 
  
  
CONSTITUTION  
STUDENTS’ GYMKHANA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY BHUBANESWAR  
BHUBANESWAR -751013  
 
 
1 
 INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY BHUBANESWAR  
 
CONSTITUTION OF THE STUDENTS’ GYMKHANA  
 
PREAMBLE 
 
We, the Students of the INDIAN INSTITUTE  OF TECHNOLOGY BHUBANESWAR , in 
order to provide a unique forum to the Students through which they will carry out their co-  
and  extra-  curricular activities , which will essentially help the m in their holistic  growth 
while advancing the general welfare of the Students, this ......... day of .........  2011, do hereby  
give to ourselves this CONST ITUTION  for governance  of STUDENTS’ GYMKHANA by 
the Students, under the active  guidance , support and participation of the Faculty and Staff  
Members of the Institute.  
 
 
CHAPTER – I  
 
1.  AIMS and OBJECTIVES  
 The aims and  object ives of the Students' Gymkhana , hereinafter referred to as Gymkhana , 
are to foster well -balanced and all -round development of the students of the Indian Institute 
of Technology  Bhubaneswar , hereinafter referred to as the Institute , through their co- and 
extra- curricular  activities to supplement  their education and to nurture  their general welfare.  
 
1.1  Students’ Activities under the aegis of the  Gymkhana  
 
a) To o rganize  and promote  games, sports, cultural , social , scientific and 
technological  activities  on a regular basis  in the Institute  and hold competitions 
periodically in which students from other well known i nstitutions can also 
participate;  
b) To p articipat e in games, sports, cultural , scientific and technological  activities 
and competitions at various levels  organized by other well known institutions of 
the country ; 
c) To set up and manage various clubs  of interest;  
d) To organize  and participate in social service activities educative  to the  students 
and beneficial  to the society ; 
e) To organize lectures , debates and workshops on various  issues including 
humanities, science and technology;  
f) To promote and develop  skills in leadership, communication  and self -reliance 
amongst the students;  
g) To promote the core values of commitment, respect, excellence and 
accountability amongst the students;  
h) Any other similar activity promoting  general welfare of the  students and the 
growth of the Institute.  2 
 1.2  The G uiding Principles  
  
a) Democratisation  of  the decision -making process at all stages through committees 
rather than by individuals;  
b) Participation of all students of the Institute in the election of office bearers; 
c) Maintaining transparency  in decisio n-making and its implementation  at all levels; 
d) Respecting  the views  of others  in forming  opinion;  
e) Practicing freedom of expressi on of  well -formed opinions ; 
f) Honouring right of  access to all relevant information;  
g) Keeping the interest s of the Institute above those of any individual. 
 
 
CHAPTER – 2  
 
STRUCTURE  OF THE  GYMKHANA  
 
2.1.  INTRODUCTION 
 
The Gymkhana will be manage d by the elected  representatives of the s tudents  under the aegis 
of the  Rector , Patron and the President  with the active support and guidance of  the Faculty 
members and  Staff me mbers of the Institute.  
 
2.2  ADMINISTRATION 
  
2.2.1  Rector of the Gymkhana  
 
The Director  of the Institute  shall be the Rector  of the Gymkhana . The Rector  shall  have the 
power and authority to nominate any member of the Faculty  as the President, Treasurer 
and/or Advisor(s) of the Gymkhana , for a period of two years . 
 
In case of any dispute arising out of the interpretation of  any clause of the constitution the 
decision of the Rector  shall be considered as final  and binding on all parties under all 
circumstances . 
 The Rector  shall have the authority to veto any decision which he /she may consider to be 
prejudicial to the interest of the Institute community.  
 
 
2.2.2  Patron  
 
The Dean, Students’ Affairs  shall be  the Patron  of the Gymkhana. In the absence of the 
Rector , he/she shall  assume and discharge the duties and re sponsibilities  of the Rector . 
  
 3 
 2.2.3 Calendar  Year  for Gymkhana  
 
One Calendar Year for all activities of Gymkhana shall  be from the first day of April of the 
current year to the last day of March of the next year.  
 
 
2.2.3  Membership and G eneral Body  
 
All registered students of the Institute shall be members of the Gymkhana , and shall 
collectively  constitute its General Body . They shall participate in all activities of and 
organized by the Gymkhana  and are required to pay the requisite fees as may be  prescribed 
by the Institute from time to time.  Authorities  and r esponsibilities of the General Body are 
listed in the following: 
a) The General  Body shall elect the office  bearers and incumbents in all  elected  posts as 
detailed hereinafter  in accordance with the Election Rules  hereinafter prescribed. The 
President shall preside over all meetings  of the General Body, and the Vice -President 
shall a ct as its Secretary.  
b) The elected office bearers of the Gymkhana, the Executive Council and it s 
Committees and Sub -committees  created and constituted as per this Constitution, 
shall discharge their stipulated functions on behalf of the General Body under normal 
conditions. 
c) The General Body shall have the power to review the performance of  the elected 
office  bearers, the Executive Council and its Committees and Sub- committees.  
d) Annual report  on the act ivities carried out during the year , annual report on the 
finance and accounts including the audit r eport  shall normally be submitted by  the 
Vice- President and the General Secretaries concerned to the  General Bod y in its  
Annual General Meeting  (AGM) . The AGM must be called during the third or 
fourth week of March . In the AGM, which shall be attended by both the outgoing and 
incoming elected Gymkhana representatives,  the written transfer of charge shall take 
place under the supervision of the President.  
e) A General Body  Meeting (GBM)  may be called by the President i f he/she is satisfied 
that a decision has to be taken by the G eneral Body. A notice for convening the GBM 
must be given at least ten days in advance . One-third  of th e total members of the 
General B ody shall constitute the quorum for the  meeting . 
f) In the case of an emergent situation , an Extra -ordinary meeting of the  General Body 
may be conven ed by the President with a n advance  notice of  minimum 24 hours. One-
fourth of the total number of  members shall  form the quorum for the Extra -ordinary 
GBM. The Extra -ordinary GBM  may recommend specific measures to be taken to 
meet the  emergent  situation.  
 
 
   4 
 2.3  EXECUTIVE COUNCIL  
  
There shall be an Executive Council to supervise and coordinate all activities of the 
Gymkhana including matters concerning promotion of and participation in various events,  
composition of teams  in games and sports  for representing the Institute , cultural events or 
such activities ; to prepare and present the annual budget;  to institute and declare the 
Gymkhana awards and to look after the  overall development of the Gymkhana. The 
Executive Council shall also frame  additional rules for conduct of the business of the 
Gymkhana.  
  
2.3.1  Composition of the Executive Council  
 
The Executive Council shall be chaired by the President , who shall be nominated by the  
Rector  from amongst the faculty members of the Institute for a period of two years . The 
Executive Council  shall consist of the following members: 
i) President   --- Chairperson  
ii) Vice- President  
iii) Treasurer  
iv) All Advisors  
v) All General Secretaries  
vi) Three UG, one PG and one Research Students nominated from different branches  
by the President in consultation with the Vice -President  
  
 NOTE: If no girl student is elected to the post of the Vice -President or General  Secretar y, 
then out of the five nom ination one must be a  girl student . 
The Vice -President shall act as the Secretary of the Council . 
The President may invite  any member of  the faculty, staff and/or student to attend the 
meeting of the Council by special  invitation.  
 
2.3.2 The Executive Council  shall meet at least four  times in a year. If a member of the 
Executive Council  fails to attend three consecutive meetings without leave of absence from 
the Council , he/she shall cease to be a member of the Executive Council . 
 2.3.3  Recommendations /resolutions  of all Committees and Sub- committees formed by  the 
Executive  Council shall be placed with the  Executive Council for approval .  
 2.3.4  The following standing committees shall assist t he Executive Council in  discharging 
its various functions: - 
 
i) Sports and Games Committee  
ii) Social and Cultural Committee  
iii) Science and Technology Committee  5 
 The Executive Council may also create other Committees, Societies and/or  Clubs for 
fostering extra- curricular  and co -curricular  activities in focused areas among the  student.  
 
2.4 PRESIDENT  
 
The President shall be the Chief Executive of the Gymkhana . The affairs of the Gymkhana  
shall be conducted by the  President  in consultation with the Executive  Council and other 
Committees and bodies  constituted by the Executive Council and/or by the President 
himself/herself . 
 
President shall chair all meetings of the Executive Council if present. In his absence one of 
the Advisors nominated by him/her shall preside over the meeting.  
 
2.5 TREASURER  
 
A member of the Faculty shall be nominated by  the Rector  as the T reasurer of the Gymkhana  
for two years.  
 
2.5.1 The Treasurer shall look after the proper operation and maintenance of Gymkhana  
accounts and shall be the custodian of all funds and financial records of the Gymkhana.  
 2.5.2  The President and the Treasurer  each shall  hold an Imprest  Fund of Rs. 10,000.00 
(Rupees ten thousand only) for meeting the  day-to-day expenses.   
 
2.5.3 The Treasurer shall be the e x-officio member  of all  committees/sub -committees/ bodies, 
including the Executive Council, Sports & Games Committee, Social & Cultural Committee, 
etc., where matters concerning expenditure of funds of the Gymkhana  is involved. 
 2.5.4 The Treasurer shall be the Convenor -Secretary of the Purchase  Committee  and the 
Finance Comm ittee of the  Gymkhana . 
 
2.6. ADVISORY COUNCIL  
  The Rector  in consultation with  the President shall appoint such numbers of  Advisors from 
amongst the members of the Faculty of the Institute  as necessary to act  as Advisors  to various 
Committees/Councils of the  Gymkhana , such as the Social & Cultural Committee , the Sports 
& Games Committee, t he Science & Technology Committee, etc. Such Advisors  shall 
collectively constitute the A dvisory Council  and shall  assist and  advise the President  and the  
Executive Council  in taking decisions  while discharging  their duties . 
 
 
   6 
 2.7  VICE -PRESIDENT  
 
2.7.1 The Vice-President  shall be a student member  of the Gymkhana and elected by the 
General Body.  
 
2.7.2  The Vice -President shall coordinate the activities of the various C ommittees and Sub -
Committees of the Gymkhana and shall Chair the  meetings of such committee(s), sub -
committee(s) and/or any other  meetings, as may be prescribed from time to time by the 
Executive Co uncil/ General Body.  
 2.7.3  The Vice -President shall act as the Convener -Secretary of the Executive Council. He / 
she shall be an Ex -officio  Member of Purchase Committee . 
 2.7.4  He/she shall also carry out such other functions as may be delegated to him /her by the 
President.  
 2.7.5  He/she shall be supervisory authority in all the students' fests  arranged by the 
Gymkhana.  
 
2.7.6  He/she shall report  from time to time  to the President and the Executive Council  on 
all matters relating to  the Gymkhana activities and/or the students affairs in general.  
 
2.7.7  He/she shall be in charge of general security  during the fests and functions . 
 
2.7.8 Along with President and Treasurer of the Gymkhana, it is the  responsibility of the 
Vice- President to meet the audit observations  expeditiously.  
 
2.7.9 Subject to the approval of the competent authority and/or the approved constitution of 
the respective body, he /she shall represent the General Body at the Senate  and the Standing 
Disciplinary Committee  of the Institute , and/or any/all other such committee(s) and 
organization(s) where the  interest of the students  of the Institute  is involved. 
 
2.8 GENERAL SECRETARIES   
 
There shall be three General  Secretaries  elected b y the General Body, one each as the 
Chairperson of the following respective Committee : 
a) Social and Cultural Committee  
b) Sports and Games Committee   
c) Science & Technology Committee  
 
2.8.1  The General Secretaries shall supervise  and co-ordinate the activities of their  
respective Committee  and shall jointly be responsible for the day -to-day activities  of the 
Gymkhana . 
 7 
 2.8.2  They shall also coordinate the activities of the various  Sub- committees constituted 
under the parent Committee and shall preside over the S ub-committee meetings.  
 
2.8.3  The General Secretaries shall be the executive heads of the programmes that fall 
under the domain of their respective Committee in the Spring/Summer  and/or any other 
festiv als, as may be organized from time  to time  by the  Executive Council . 
 2.8.4  They shall carry out such other related functions as may be assigned to them by  the 
President and /or the Vice -President.  
 
2.9  SECRETARIES  
 
To aid and assist the General  Secretaries in  discharging  their duties , not more than 5 (five) 
members  shall be  elected by the General Body as Secretaries  to each of the Committees. The 
actual number of Secretaries in any Committee in  the next year  shall be decided by the 
President  in the current year at least two weeks before the Election of the Gymkhana is 
announc ed. The Secretaries  along with the General Secretary shall be responsible for the  
development and the smooth running  of the day -to-day activities that fall under the aegis of 
their respective Committee. They shall also responsible for  such other related functions as 
may be  assigned to them from time to time  by thei r respective General Secretary . 
 
2.10 FINANCE COMMITTEE  
 
2.10.1 The Financial Year shall be from the 1
st April of one year to the 30th
  April of the next 
year.  
2.10.2 The Finance Committee  (FC)  shall consist of the following members: 
 
i) President, who shall be the ex -officio Chai rperson  of the FC ; 
ii) Treasurer, who shall be the ex -officio Secretary -Convener of the FC ; 
iii) Vice- President  – ex-officio;  
iv) One student member, nominated by the Executive Council  for a period of one 
year; 
v) One Advisor, nominated by the Rector  for a period of two years  
 
Three members shall form a quorum. 
 
2.10.3 President shall chair all meetings of the FC if present. In his absence t he Advisor shall 
preside over the meeting.  
   
2.10.4 The FC shall perform  the following function:  
a) Supervise and manage the finances of the Gymkhana ; 
b) Prepare the Annual budget of the Gymkhana ; 
c) Raise funds for advancement of the general interests of the Gymkhana.  8 
  
2.10.5 The minutes of every meeting of the  FC shall be placed before the Executive Council 
for ratification.  
  
2.11 PURCHASE COMMITTEE   
 
2.11.1 All purchases to be made by the Gymkhana  should be approved by the Purchase 
Committee  (PC) prior to the purchase. The  PC shall consist of the following  members: 
i) President, who shall be the ex -officio Chairperson of the P C; 
ii) Treasurer, who shall be the ex -officio Secretary -Convener of the P C; 
iii) Vice- President – ex-officio;  
iv) One student member, nominated by the Executive Council;  
v) One Advisor, nominated by the Rector . 
 Chairperson can invite any faculty member of the Institute in any meeting of the PC for 
expert advice.  
Three members of PC shall form a quorum.  
 2.11.2 President shall chair all meetings of the PC if present. In his absence the Advisor shall 
preside over the meeting.  
 
2.11.3 The Institute purchase procedures  shall be foll owed  for all purchases for the 
Gymkhana. In this regard t he President shall have the same authority and power as the head 
of a S chool and the PC shall have the same function and responsibility  as tha t of the Purchase 
Committee of a S chool. 
 
 
2.12 GYMKHANA FUND 
 
2.12.1 Gymkhana shall maintain a fund to which shall be credited:  
a) All moneys provided by the Institute ; 
b) All Gymkhana fees  paid by members; 
c) Any money received by way of donations or grants, which the Institute permits the Gymkhana to accept.  
 
2.12.2  All money credited to the Fund of the Gymkhana shall be deposited in an account in 
any bank  as the Rector may decide.  
 2.12.3  The account thus opened shall  be operated jointly by the President and the Treasurer.  
    9 
 2.13 AUDIT  
 
It will be the collective  responsibility of the President,  the Treasurer and the Vice president to 
get the annual accounts audited by an Auditor appointed by the Executive Council and 
approved by the Rector . The Audited Account shall be placed before the Executive Council  
for approval. The approved account shall have to be placed before AGM of the Gy mkhana 
for rat ification.  
 
CHAPTER – 3  
 
GYMKHANA E MBLEM  
 
The Gymkhana shall have its own Emblem. The First Executive Council shall have the Emblem designed and approved by the Rector. The Gymkhana shall use this Emblem, either singly or together with the Institute Emblem if the Institute approves, for all official 
communications and other official purposes as deemed fit by the Executive Council . 
  
CHAPTER – 4  
 
RULES FOR GYMKHANA E LECTION  
 
4.1 ELECTION OFFCER  
 The President shall appoint a faculty member as Election Officer  to conduct the general 
elections of the Gymkhana for every year . 
The Election Officer shall be responsible for proper conduct of the Election. He may take the 
assistance of members of the faculty and staff as and when required for the smooth conduct 
of the elections. Within the overall framework mentioned in this Chapter,  he/she shall frame 
detailed rules and regulations and c ode of conduct for  conducting the election. He /she may 
declare the provisional results immediately after the counting of votes and shall submit the results of the election to the President for ratification.  
The decision of the Election Officer in all matters arising in connection with the election shall 
be final and binding.  
 
4.2 TIME OF ELECTION  
 
The Annual  Gymkhana  Election shall normally be  held in the last week of February or first 
week of March  of the year . However, under ex ceptional situations the annual elections may  
be advanced  or postponed by  a maximum period of one month by the President in 
consultation with the Rector . 
 10 
 4.3 VOTING RIGHTS  
All members of Gymkhana  shall have voting rights. In the event of a student having 
withdrawn his/her name from the Institute rolls f or a full academic year, shall forfeit his/her 
voting right for the corresponding period.  
 
4.4 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA  FOR CANDIDATURE  
Any member of the Gymkhana, who meets the eligi bility criteria given below, unless 
specifically disqualified  otherwise , is eligible to contest for the posts in the Gymkhana. The 
elections will be contested strictly on a non- sectarian , non-religious and apolitical basis. Use 
of any sectarian, religious or political symbols is strictly prohibited. All office bearers shall 
be elected by secret ballot.  
 
4.4.1 General E ligibility Criteria  
i) The contestant must be a member of the Gymkhana. 
ii) The contestant must not have any back log in his/her academic record in the year of 
contesting the election.  
iii) A member, who has been subjected to  any dis ciplinary action by the Hostel 
Administration , Institute Disciplinary Committee  or Examination Malpractice 
Committee  and/or by any authority of the Institute, shall not be eligible  to contest. 
iv) Candidate who has repeated any academic year in the past  for whatever reason  is not 
allowed to contest.  
  
4.4.2 Post-specific E ligibility Criteria  
 
i) A Candidate must have a minimum CGPA of 7.5 to contest for the post of Vic e-
President and a minimum CGPA of 7.0 for all other posts. 
ii) To contest  for the post of V ice-President  the candidate must have been a member for 
at least two  academic years  for undergraduate students and one academic year for 
postgraduate students . 
iii) To contest for any other post  the candidate must have been a member for at least one  
academic year .  
 
Suppression of any fact regarding the eligibility criteria in the nomination form will lead to  
cancellation of the candidature. 
 4.4.3 Codes of Conduct  during  Election  
 
i) Any activity which causes rift amongst members and people of different castes, 
communities, r eligions  or languages , and/or between any group(s) of students is 
prohibited. 
ii) No printed materials (p osters, displays, visiting cards, pamphlet s etc.) are allowed for 
the purpose of canvassing.  11 
 iii) No institute property should be defaced  or damaged for the purpose of canvassing . 
iv) Candidates are not permitted to  hold meeting s for campaign ing in any hall of 
residence without prior written permission of the concerned W arden.  
v) Voters must not be intimidated in any form.   
vi) No canvassing is allowed on the day of election.  
 
Any act of violation of code of conduct by any  candidate or his/her supporter (s) will lead to 
the cancellation of  the candidature of the member. If such violation falls under the purview of 
Institute Disciplinary Committee, appropriate proceeding by that Committee shall be initiated.  
  
4.5 CRITERIA FOR GETTING  ELECTED  
 
4.5.1 For all posts except the post of the Vice- President , candidates shall be declared 
elected on the basis of simp le majority of all valid votes.  
  
4.5.2 If there are less than four candidates , the Vice -President shall be  declared elected  on 
the basis of simple majority of all valid votes. Otherwise , he/she shall be elected  on the basis 
of one single transferable preferential v oting system.  
 
NOTE on single transferable preferential voting system : If there are n (n>3)  
candidates , voters shall be required to give at most (n -1) preferences. Counting  shall 
be done in successive rounds . In the first round, first preference votes  shall only be 
counted and the candidate with the least first preference votes shall be eliminated . In 
the next round, second preference  votes of the eliminated candidate  shall be added to 
the respective first preference  count of continuing candidates  and the candidate with 
the lowest  tally shall be eliminated . This procedure shall be repeated until  all but one 
candidate remains , who shall be declared elected .  
 
4.6 TERM OF OFFICE  
 
The term of office of all the elected members shall be one year only commenci ng from the 
first day of the  year. No member shall be allowed to seek re- election in the same position in 
the next or subsequent years.  
 In case of any vacancy aris es in any post due to whatever reason, the vacancy shall be filled 
up for the remaining period of the tenure of the previous candidate by nomination by the 
Rector  in consultation with the President. 
 
 
  
 12 
 CHAPTER – 5  
 
DISCIPLINE RY MATTERS  
 
5.1 All members of Gymkhana  are to maintain utmost discipline while organizing and/or 
participating in any event of Gymkhana.  
 
5.2 Gymkhana  members  participating either singly or in a contingent in outside events 
organized by other institutions/organizations must behave in a manner behoving the students 
of an institute of national importan ce during travelling, staying and conduction of the events .  
If the members are partici pating in a contingent, adherence  to the instructions and advices of 
the Professor -in-Charge / leader  of the contingent is mandatory.  
 5.3 Any violation of the above code s of conduct shall be considered as a serious breach of 
discipline and disciplinary action as per Institute rules shall be initiated. Over and above if 
proved guilty, the member(s) shall be debarred f rom organizing and/or participating in future 
events either at home or outside. 
  
 
CHAPTER – 6  
 
CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS  
 6.1 An amendment to the existing Constitution , if considered necessary, may be initiated by 
the President on his/her own initiative and/or on the petition of not less than fifty members. In 
the later case the President ha s the discretion of not initiating  the procedure. 
 
6.2 Any motion for amendment to the existing Constitution shall be taken up in a properly 
convened GBM or AGM  and shall be passed if at least 2/3rd  (two-third s) of the members 
present votes in favour of  the amendment . 
 6.3 The amendment  thus passed shall be placed before the  Rector  for approval , who 
reserves the right to disallow any such proposed amendment. 
 
________________ 
 
 