Introduction to Electronics  
 
This course will be your first encounter with semiconductor devices. It is pretty much a linear 
course (though the devices you study are non -linear) and hardly involves complex 
mathematical concepts.  The whole course can be divided into two parts:  
• Semiconductor Devices  
• Applications of Semiconductor Devices  
 
For basic understanding: All About Electronics (YouTube)  
 
Semiconductor Devices   
 
• Diode : Basic structure and types, operating principle, current -voltage characteristic, large 
and small -signal models, zener diode operating principle.  
 
• Bipolar Junction Transistor (BJT) : Structure and modes of operation; NPN and PNP 
transistor in active mode, DC analysis. (Revise Thevenin/ Norton for smooth circuit 
analysis)  
 
• Metal -oxide semiconductor field -effect transistor (MOSFET) : Working principle, nmos, 
pmos. (foundation for the ‘VLSI Design’ course introduced to the ECE students in 6th sem)  
 
• Operational Amplifier : Principle, the concept of feedback, offset voltage, bias current.   
 
• Oscillators : Basic principle of sinusoidal oscillation, phase -shift oscillator, Wien -bridge 
oscillator.  
 
Application of Semi -Conductor D evices   
 
• Diode applications : Rectifier circuits, Clipper and Clamper circuits, Zener diode as a 
voltage regulator.   
 
• BJT applications : BJT as a switch and amplifier, small -signal equivalent circuits, single -
stage CE amplifier.  
 
• MOSFET application : MOSFET as a switch and amplifier.  
 
• Operational amplifier applications :  Principle, summing amplifier, inverting and non -
inverting configuration, voltage follower, differentiator, and integrator. (highly important 
from the core interviews point of view)   
 
Examination Hacks   
 
Dr. Srinivas Boppu (Batch of 2017)  
Most of the paper is from the tutorials, lecture notes (slides) as well as pre vious years’ papers 
so please go through them thoroughly. As most of the concepts involve critical reasoning, it will be prudent to listen to the class with a great focus which will save a lot of time for other 
subjects.  
Grading is lenient. Step marks are given, hence write all the steps. Even if the final answer is 
wrong, as long as you've written your arguments veneered by a little understanding, you will 
obtain marks for that question.   
 
Dr. Anoop Thomas (Batch of 2018)   
 
There will be two class tests which are basically nothing but a direct bonus of 20 marks in the 
name of ‘teacher assessment’, so savour the opportunity. As most of the concepts involve 
critical reasoning, it will be prudent to listen to the class with a gr eat focus which will save a 
lot of time for other subjects. Grading is strict, Final answers are very important, marks for 
steps are usually not given, hence avoid silly mistakes. Usually, there will be one tougher exam  
(either mid -sem or end -sem), so if th e mid -sem felt easy, the end -sem might be tougher. Pay 
extra attention to the assignments, most of the exam questions are framed around those.   
 
Dr. Anoop Thomas (Batc h of 2019)  
You can learn the most in the class . Just be focused and go with the class flow. The subject 
will be very interesting  but requires practice . Practice solving questions as much as you can . 
Your main focus in the examination should be solving the questions with complete accuracy 
and most importantly  as quick as you can. Managing  the time during the exam would be a 
challenge. Avoid silly mistakes (that is what happens with this subject mostly) . 
 
Grading for 2019 Ba tch. 
