Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
1 
 Table of Content  
1. Compliance report  
2. B. Tech and Dual Degree ( 1st and 2nd Semester Common C ourses)  
a. First Semester courses  
b. Second Semester Courses  
c. Syllabus  
3. B. Tech and Dual Degree (3rd Semester – 8th Semester  Courses ) 
a. Civil Engineering  
b. Computer Science and Engineering  
c. Electrical Engineering  
d. Electronics and Communication Engineering  
e. Mechanical Engineering  
f. Metallurgical and Materials Engineering  
4. Dual Degree (9th and 10th Semester  Courses ) 
a. Civil Engineering  
i. Environmental  
ii. Structural  
iii. Transportation  
b. Computer Scie nce and Engineering  
c. Electrical Engineering – Power Electronics Drives  
d. Mechanical Engineering  
i. Manufacturing Engineering  
ii. Mechanical Systems Design  
iii. Thermal Science and Engineering  
e. Metallurgical and Materials Engineering  
5. List of Lateral Courses  
6. List of Breadth  Courses  
  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
2 
 Complian ce Report  
Components  Subjects  Credit 
Recommended  Credit 
Approved  
1. Common Core  (i) English  4 4  
(ii) Basic Science and 
Mathematics  20 20 
(iii) General Sciences  6 6 
(iv) Engineering Sciences  27 27 
2. Breadth Basket  (i) Breadth -1 
(ii) Breadth -2 
(iii) Breadth -3 
(iv) Breadth -4 12-14 3/4 
3  
3/4 
3/4 
3. Miscellaneous  (i) Seminar  
(ii) Internship  
(iii) Project  14 2 
2 
10 
4. Laterals  (i) Lateral -1  
(ii) Lateral -2  
(iii) Lateral -3  9-12 3 
3/4 
3/4 
5. Verticals  Theory  58-68 2nd year - 20 
3rd year –23/24  
4th year – 19/25  
Laboratory  18-24 18 
TOTAL   168-189 172/184  
 
  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
3 
 1st Semester and 2nd Semester  (Common to All Disciplines of Study)  
 
SEMESTER – I 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Mathematics -1 MA1L001  3-1-0 4 4 4 
Physics/  
Chemistry  PH1L001/ 
CY1L001  3-1-0 4 4 5-6 
 Mechanics / English for Communications  or  
 Learning English  ME1L001/  
HS1L001  
or HS1L002  3-1-0/ 
3-0-2 or  
3-1-0 4 4/ 
5 or 4  6-9 
Electrical Technology / Introduction to 
Programing and Data Structures  EE1L001 / 
CS1L001   
3-1-0 4 4 10-11 
Introduction to Manufacturing Processes /  
Engineering Drawing and Graphics  ME1P001/ 
CE1P001  0-0-3/ 
1-0-3 2/3 3/4 11-12 
Physics Laboratory/  Chemistry Laboratory  PH1P001/ 
CY1P001  0-0-3 2 3 12-13 
Electrical Technology Laboratory   / 
Introduction to Programing and Data 
Structures Laboratory  EE1P001/  
CS1P001  0-0-3 2 3 13 
Extra Academic Activity -1 ID1T001  0-0-3 1 3  
  Total  22/23+1  25/27 or 26+3   
SEMESTER – II  
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Mathematics -2 MA1L002  3-1-0 4 4 14 
Chemistry/  
Physics  CY1L001/ 
PH1L001  3-1-0 4 4 5-6 
English for Communication   or Learning 
English /   Mechanics  HS1L001 or  
HS 1L002/ 
ME1L001  3-0-2 or              
3-1-0/ 
3-1-0 4 5 or 4/  
4 6-9 
Introduction to Programming and Data 
Structures/ Electrical Technology  CS1L001/ 
EE1L001  3-1-0 4 4 10-11 
Engineering Drawing and Graphics  / 
Introduction to Manufacturing Processes  CE1P001/ 
ME1P001  1-0-3/  
0-0-3 3/2 4/3 12-13 
Chemistry Laboratory/ Physics Laboratory  CY1P001/ 
PH1P001  0-0-3 2 3 11-12 
Electrical Technology Laboratory   / 
Introduction to Programing and Data 
Structures Laboratory  EE1P001/  
CS1P001  0-0-3 2 3 13 
Extra Academic Activity -2 ID1T002  0-0-3 1 3  
  Total  23/22+1  27 or 26/ 25+3   
 
 
Syllabus for each course is given in the following pages.  
  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
4 
 Syllabus for First Year Courses (Common to All Disciplines of Study)  
SEMESTER – I 
Subject Code:  MA1L001  Subject Name: 
Mathematics -1 L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
Calculus:  Rolle’s theorem, Lagranges theorem, Cauchy ’s mean value theorem (Taylor’s 
and Maclaurin theorems with remainders), Indeterminate forms, Concavity and 
convexity of a curve, points of inflexion, maximum, minimum of a function, 2nd  
derivative test for max min, Asymptotes and curvature, Cartesian cur ve tracing, polar 
curve  tracing.   
Calculus of Several Variables :  Limit, continuity and differentiability of functions of 
several variables, partial derivatives and their geometrical interpretation, differentials, 
derivatives of composite and implicit func tions, derivatives of higher order and their 
commutativity, Euler’s theorem on homogeneous functions, harmonic functions, Taylor’s 
expansion of functions of several variables, maxima and minima of functions of several 
variables, Lagrange’s method of multip liers.  
Vector Calculus:  Double and triple integrals, Scalar and vector fields, level surfaces, 
directional derivative, Gradient, Curl, Divergence, line and surface integrals, theorems of 
Green, Gauss and Stokes. Beta and Gamma functions.  
Ordinary Differen tial Equations:  First order differential equations, exact, linear and 
Bernoulli’s form, second order differential equations with constant coefficients, Euler’s 
equations, particular integrals by: variation of parameters, undetermined coefficients, 
operator  method, system of differential equations.   
 
Text Books:  
1. Narayan S. and Mittal P. K.  Differential Calculus and Integral Calculus , S. Chand & 
Company Ltd.  
2. Thomas   G. B.  and Finney   R. L.  Calculus and Analytic Geometry , Pearson  
3. Kreyszig E.  Advanced Engineering Mathematics , John Wiley & Sons  
5. Simmons G. F. and Robertson J. S.  Differential Equations with applications and 
Historical notes , Tata McGraw -Hill Publishing Company Limited, New Delhi, India  
 
Reference Books:  
1. Bartle R. G. and Sherbert D. R . Introduction to Real Analysis , Wiley India  
2. Jain R. K. and Iyengar S. R. K.   Advanced Engineering Mathematics,  Narosa  
3. Apostol T. M.  Calculus - Vol.2, Wiley India  
4. Ross S. L.  Differential Equations , Wiley India  
5. Coddington E. A.  An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations , Prentice Hall  
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
5 
 Subject Code:  PH1L001  Subject Name:  Physics  L-T-P: 3-
1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
Classical Physics: Review of Newtonian mechanics, Lagrangian mechanics, constraints, 
principle of virtual work, D’Alembert’s principle, Action Principle and Lagrange's 
equations,   Velocity dependent potentials, Legendre Transformation and Hamiltonian 
equations, Central forces, Kepler’s problem, Waves and Oscillations, Damped and Forced 
Oscillations, normal modes, Basics of Special Relativity, Galilean and Lorentz 
transformations, Time dilation and length contraction, relativistic kinematics and mass -
energy equivalence. Electromagnetic Waves and Optics: Maxwell’s equations, wave 
equation, pl ane electromagnetic waves, longitudinal and transverse waves, 
superposition, wave packets, two and three dimensional waves, energy - momentum, 
Poynting’s theorem, electromagnetic boundary conditions, Laser, Young’s experiment, 
interferometers, diffraction, Fraunhofer diffraction (single slit), dispersion. Wave 
Mechanics: Failure of classical physics, qualitative review of relevant experiments, de 
Broglie waves, uncertainty principle, wave function and Schrodinger equation, probability 
interpretation, particl e on a chain, potential barrier and quantum tunneling, potential 
well, Harmonic oscillator, operator algebra, Hydrogen atom and angular momentum 
algebra.  
 
Text/ Reference Books:  
 
1.   Crawford F.S.   Waves,  Vol. 3, Berkely Physics Series . 
2.   Goldstein,  Classical Mechanics , Pole and Safko, Pearson Education Inc.  
3.   Saleh and Teich.  Fundamentals of Photonics , Wiley -Interscience.  
4.   Ghatak A.  Optics , McGraw -Hill. 
5.   Griffiths D.J.  Introduction to Quantum Mechanics , Pearson Education Inc.  
6.   Pain H. J.  The Physics of Vibrations and Waves , Wiley.  
7.   Resnick R.  Introduction to Special Relativity , John Wiley (Asia).  
8.   Landau L. and Lifshitz E.  Mechanics , Oxford   
9.   Zweibach B.   A First Course in String Theory , Cambridge University Press  
10.  Hecht E . Introduction to Optics , Addison -Wesley.   
11.  Feynmann Lecture series on Physics.  
12.  Sakurai J. J.  Modern Quantum Mechanics , Benjamin -Cummings.  
 
Subject Code: CY1L001  Subject Name: Chemistry  L-T-P: 3-1-
0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
Energetics & Kinetics:  (a) Basic Concepts and Laws of Thermodynamics; Entropy; 
Engineering Devices: Efficiency & Conversion; Thermochemistry; Bioenergetics. (b) Basic 
Rate Laws; Multistep Reactions; Activation Energy. (c) Transport of Ions and Gases in 
biofluids and ac ross biomembranes; Equilibrium:  Proton Equilibrium (aqueous & non -
aqueous) including Buffers. Phase Equilibrium.  Redox & Electrochemistry:  Basic Concepts 
& Laws; Battery (Automobile to Ni -Cd and beyond); Fuel Cells; Latimer, Frost, and 
Pourbaix diagram; Co rrosion.  Bonding Models & Properties:  (a) In Molecules, 
Supramolecules, Metals and Metal Complexes; (b) Implications on electrical, ma gnetic, 
and optical properties, (c) Absorption and  Emission Spectroscopy.  
Functional Materials - Design & Application:  (a) Synthetic Polymers (carbon framework, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
6 
 silicon framework, fluorinated polymer), Bio & biodegradable polymers. (b) Surfactants. 
(c) Nanostructures, Soft materials and Thin Films. (b) Emerging app lications in Energy 
harvesting, Memory Storage and Micro -fabrication. Industrial & Bio -inspired 
Chemistry:  (a) Case studies on Industrial organics with emphasis to Drugs (b) Oxidation, 
Reduction, Catalytic hydrogenation and Electron transfer.  Molecules in Daily Life:  A short 
tour on molecules behind taste, smell,  pain, colour and sex.  
 
 
Text/Reference Books:   
1. Brown L. and Holme, T.  Chemistry for Engineering Students , Thomson Brooks.  
2. Atkins P. and Paula J. D. Atkins’  Physical Chemistry , Oxford.  
3. Shriver, D. F. and Atkins, P. W. Atkins’  Inorganic Chemistry , Oxford.  
4. Morrison R. T. and Boyd R. N.  Organic Chemistry , Prentice Hall.  
5. Steed J. W. and Atwood J. L.  Supramolecular Chemistry , John -Wiley.   
6. Caruther W.  Reagents in Organic Chemistry , Cambridge University Press.  
7. Wiseman P.  An Introduction to Ind ustrial Organic Chemistry , Applied Science.   
8. Hall N.  The New Chemistry , Cambridge University Press.  
9. Atkins P. Atkins’  Molecules  Cambridge University Press.  
10. Cengel Y. A. and Boles M. A.  Thermodynamics -An Engineering Approach , Tata 
McGraw - Hill 
 
Subject Code:   ME1L001  Subject Name:   Mechanics  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
Force systems:  Moment of a force about a point an d about an axis; couple moment; 
reduction of a force system to a force and a couple.  Equilibrium:  Free body diagram; 
equations of equilibrium; problems in two and three dimensions; plane frames and 
trusses.  Friction:  Laws of Coulomb friction, problems involving large and small contact 
surfaces;  square threaded screws; belt friction; rolling resistance.  Kinematics and 
Kinetics of particles:  Particle dynamics in rectangular coordinates cylindrical coordinates 
and in terms of path variables; central force motion.  Properties of areas:  Moments of 
inertia and product of inertia of areas, polar moment of inerti a, principal axes and 
principal moments of inertia.  Concept of stress and strain:  Normal stress, shear stress, 
state of stress at a point, ultimate strength, allowable stress, factor of safety; normal 
strain, shear strain, Hooke’s law, Poisson’s ratio, gen eralized Hooke’s law; analysis of 
axially loaded members.  Torsion:  Torsion of cylindrical bars, torsional stress, modulus of 
rigidity and deformation.  Flexural loading:  Shear and moment in beams; load, shear and 
moment relationship; shear and moment diagra ms; flexure formula; shear stress in 
beams; differential equation of the elastic curve, deflection of beams.  Transformation of 
stress and strain:  Transformation of stress and strain, principal stresses, principal 
strains, Mohr’s circle for stress and strai n. Combined loading:  Axial and torsional; axial 
and bending; axial, torsional and bending.  Column:  Buckling of slender columns, Euler 
bucking load for different end conditions . 
 
 
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Vector Mechanics for Engineers:   Statics and Dynamics  - Ferdinand P. Beer, E. Russell   
Johnston, Jr. (TMH)  
2. Engineering Mechanics:  Statics and Dynamics  - I.H. Shames (Pearson)  
3. Engineering Mechanics  - S. Timoshenko,   D. H. Young (TMH)  
4. Mechanics of Materials  - Ferdinand Beer , E. Russell Johnston, Jr., J. DeWolf (TMH)  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
7 
 1. 5. Elements of Strength of Materials  - S. Timoshenko,   D. H. Young (East West Press)  
2. 6. Mechanics of Materials  - James M. Gere, Barry J. Goodno (CL Engg)  
3. 7. Engineering Mechanics  -  Stephan Timoshenko, D. Young (TMH)  
4. 8. Strength of Materials (Part 1)  – S P Timoshenko (CBS)  
 
Subject Code: 
HS1L001  Subject Name: English for 
Communication  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
English for Communication is an amalgamation of Literature, Language and  
Communication.  The Literature component of the course comprises of Prose and Poetry.   
Poetry :  
A selection of poetry pieces spanning from 16th century to the Post -Modern Period in 
English, American and Indian Literature are chosen to introduce to the students to the 
different poets from different ages and countries and also to acquaint them with the 
various poetic forms like Sonnet, Ballad, Elegy, Didactic, Dramatic, Nature, Lyric,  
Romantic, etc. The list is an indicative one . 16th century - 17th century - Geoffrey 
Chaucer, William Shakespeare, Edmund Spenser, Ben Johnson, Thomas Wyatt.  
17th century - 18th century - John Milton, John Donne, George Herbert, John Dryden, 
Oliver Goldsmith.  18th century - 19th century - Alexander  Pope, Thomas Gray, Robert 
Burns, William Blake, W illiam Wordsworth, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Lord Byron, P.B.  
Shelley, John Keats, Robert Bridges, Robert Southey, Samuel Johnson.  19th century - 
20th century - Alfred Tennyson, Robert Browning, Walter de la Mare, Thomas Hardy, A.E. 
Housman, Rudyard Kipling, D.H. Lawrence, Wilfred Owen, D.G. Rossetti, Christina 
Rossetti, Emily Dickinson, Gerald Manley Hopkins, Charlotte Bronte, Lewis Caroll, Edward 
Fitzgerald, Walt Whitman.  20th century - Present - Ted Hughes, Louis MacNeice, W.B. 
Yeats, Stephen Spender, W.H. Au den, Nissim Ezekiel, Sarojini Naidu, Jayanta Mahapatra, 
Robert Frost, , Ezra Pound, E.E. Cummings, T.S. Eliot, Walt Whitman, A.K. Ramanujan, 
Kamala Das, Rabindranath Tagore, Jack Prelutsky,   Chinua Achebe, Maya Angelou, 
Margaret Atwood, Leonard Cohen, Loui se Erdrich, Leslie Marmon Silko.  
Prose : 
A selection of fictional and non -fictional prose pieces spanning from 17th century to the 
Post-Modern Period.   Fiction and non -fictional pieces from English, American, Russian 
and Indian Literature are chosen to intr oduce the students to different writings from 
different ages and countries. The list is an inclusive one consisting of short stories, 
essays, excerpts, extracts from novels, biographies and memoirs, history, travel and 
other forms.  17th century -18th centur y: Charles Dickens, William Makepeace Thackeray, 
George Eliot, Thomas Hardy, Lewis Carroll, Arthur Conan Doyle, John Bunyan,   Rudyard 
Kipling, H.G. Wells, R.L, Stevenson, Jane Austen, Emily Bronte, Charles Lamb, F.M. 
Dostoyevsky, Nikolai Gogol, Daniel Dafo e, Jonathan Swift, Lewis Carroll; 19th century -
20th century:  Oscar Wilde, O Henry, H.H. Munro, Mark Twain, Somerset Maughaum, 
Nathaniel Hawthorne, G.B. Shaw, G.K. Chesterton, Agatha Christie, Gerald Durrell, Will 
Durant, E.M. Forster, Aldous Huxley, Henry David Thoreau, Anton Chekov, Maxim Gorky, 
Leo Tolstoy, George Orwell, Rabindranath Tagore, M.K. Gandhi, J. Nehru, Virginia Woolf, 
Guy De Maupassant, Washington Irving, Margaret Fuller, Charles Darwin, Arthur Conan 
Doyle, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Ernest Hemingw ay, Edgar Allan Poe.  20th century -
Present:  J.M. Coetzee, R.K. Narayan, R.K. Laxman, A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, Khushwant 
Singh, Anita Desai, Yann Martel, Ken Kesey, Stephen King, Thomas King, Richard 
Wright, N Scott Momaday, Chetan Bhagat, J. Krishnamurthy, Virginia Woolf, Gerald 
Vizenor, Alice Walker, Chinua Achebe, Jeffrey Archer, Issac Asimov, Roald Dahl, J.R.R. 
Tolkien, D.H. Lawrence, James Joyce, Oran Pamuk, Salman Rushdie, Bertrand Russell, 
Ruskin Bond, A.G. Gardiner, John Steinbeck.            Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
8 
 Communica tion: 
Because communication is so important in business, businesses want and need people 
with good communication skills. Business communication is a blend of skills like writing 
and speaking well, displaying proper etiquettes and listening attentively.  
Communications through technology greatly enhances one’s ability to communicate 
effectively and articulately. For example, E -mails often result in a sender’s language 
skills being placed in front of different people simultaneously; while audio and video will 
reveal the calibre of one’s verbal and diplomatic strengths. The communication aspect of 
the English for Communication Course includes:   
 
1. The Basics of Business Communication  
2. Importance of Listening  
3. Barriers in the Communication Process  
4. Busines s Letters (Letter of Inquiry, Complaint, Cover Letter)  
5. Resume Writing  
6. Memo and Memo Reports  
7. Report Writing  
8. Fax and E Mail  
 
English Laboratory : 
Objective: The laboratory component included in the course provides an ideal platform 
for students to  prepare themselves into confident and self -assured individuals. The Lab 
course is designed to inculcate confidence and clarity in presentation and expression of 
thought, views and ideas through practice and exercises. It constitutes six basic 
components t o improve listening, reading and writing skill of the students.   
Lessons:  
1. Pronunciation (Basic sounds of English like   Long/Short Vowels; All consonants)  
2. Stress Intonation (Rising and Falling)  
3. Speaking - Oral Presentations, Group Discussions, Story  Telling, Role Plays  
4. Listening – Importance and Practice  
5. Reading - Practice  
6. Writing (Paragraph writing, good writing and bad writing with samples, Indianism),  
Grammar (Basic - Articles, Prepositions, Verbs, Common Errors , etc)  
 
Text/Reference Books:  
1. John Seely,  The Oxford Guide to Writing and Speaking , OUP  
2. Krishna Mohan and Meenakshi Raman,  Effective English Communication ,  TMH 
3. R.W.Lesikar and John.D. Pettit,  Business Communication: Theory and Application ,  All 
India Traveller Booksell er 
4. Francis Soundaraj,  Speaking and Writing for Effective Business Communication , 
Macmillan.   
5. Herta A. Murphy, et al.,  Effective Business Communication , Tata Mc -Graw Hill: New 
Delhi  
6. Ronald B. Adler and George Rodman,   Understanding Human Communication , Oxford 
University Press:   New York  
 
Subject Code: HS1L002  Subject Name: Learning 
English  L-T-P:  
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
The Learning English Course is designed to improve the English Listening, Speaking, 
Reading and Speaking skills of students.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
9 
 I. Prose  
A selection of fictional and non -fictional prose pieces spanning from 17th century to the 
Post-Modern Period.   Fiction and non -fictional pieces from English, American, Russian 
and Indian Literature are chosen to introd uce the students to different writings from 
different ages and countries. The list is an inclusive one consisting of short stories, 
essays, excerpts, extracts from novels, biographies and memoirs, history, travel and 
other forms.   
17th century - 18th centur y- Charles Dickens, William Makepeace Thackeray, George 
Eliot, Thomas Hardy, Lewis Carroll, Arthur Conan Doyle, John Bunyan,   Rudyard Kipling, 
H.G. Wells, R.L, Stevenson, Jane Austen, Emily Bronte, Charles Lamb, F.M. Dostoyevsky, 
Nikolai Gogol, Daniel Dafo e, Jonathan Swift, Lewis Carroll.  
19th century - 20th century - Oscar Wilde, O Henry, H.H. Munro, Mark Twain, 
Somerset Maughaum, Nathaniel Hawthorne, G.B. Shaw, G.K. Chesterton, Agatha 
Christie, Gerald Durrell, Will Durant, E.M. Forster, Aldous Huxley, Henry  David Thoreau, 
Anton Chekov, Maxim Gorky, Leo Tolstoy, George Orwell, Rabindranath Tagore, M.K. 
Gandhi, J. Nehru, Virginia Woolf, Guy De Maupassant, Washington Irving, Margaret 
Fuller, Charles Darwin, Arthur Conan Doyle, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Ernest Heming way, 
Edgar Allan Poe.  
20th century - Present - J.M. Coetzee, R.K. Narayan, R.K. Laxman, A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, 
Khushwant Singh, Anita Desai, Yann Martel, Ken Kesey, Stephen King, Thomas King, 
Richard Wright, N Scott Momaday, Chetan Bhagat, J. Krishnamurthy, Vir ginia Woolf, 
Gerald Vizenor, Alice Walker, Chinua Achebe, Jeffrey Archer, Issac Asimov, Roald Dahl, 
J.R.R. Tolkien, D.H. Lawrence, James Joyce, Oran Pamuk, Salman Rushdie, Bertrand 
Russell, Ruskin Bond, A.G. Gardiner, John Steinbeck.  
II. Writing - Paragraph , Essay, Précis, Dictation, Comprehension, Letter Writing  
III. English Tutorial - Practice Listening and Speaking English   
IV. English Practice - Grammar Assignments and Workbook (Everyday English Level I/II)  
 
Text/Reference Books:  
1. John Seely,  The Oxford Guide to Writing and Speaking , OUP  
2. Krishna Mohan and Meenakshi Raman , Effective English Communication ,  TMH 
3. R.W.Lesikar and John.D. Pettit,  Business Communication: Theory and Application ,  All 
India Traveller Bookseller  
4. Francis Soundaraj,  Speaking  and Writing for Effective Business Communication , 
Macmillan.  
5. Herta A. Murphy, et al.,  Effective Business Communication , Tata Mc -Graw Hill: New 
Delhi 
1. 6. Ronald B. Adler and George Rodman,   Understanding Human Communication , Oxford 
University Press:   New York  
 
 
 
 
 
Subject Code: 
EE1L001  Subject Name: Electrical 
Technology  L-T-P:  
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
10 
 Introduction: Sources of energy; General structure of electrical power systems, Power 
transmission and distribution via overhead lines and underground cables, Steam, Hydel, 
and Nuclear power generation; DC Networks: Kirchhoff’s laws, node voltage and mesh 
current methods, Delta -star and star -delta conversion, Superposition principle, 
Thevenin’s, Norton’s theorems and Maximum power transfe r theorem; Single phase AC 
Circuits: Single phase EMF generation, average and effective values of sinusoids, 
solution of R,L,C series circuits, the j operator, complex representation of impedances, 
phasor diagram, power factor, power in complex notation, s olution of parallel and series 
– parallel circuits; Three phase AC Circuits: Three phase EMF generation, delta and Y – 
connections, line and phase quantities, solution of three phase circuits, balanced supply 
voltage and balanced load, phasor diagram, meas urement of power in three phase 
circuits, Three phase four wire circuits; Magnetic Circuits: Ampere’s circuital law, B – H 
curve, solution of magnetic circuits, hysteresis and eddy current losses; Transformers: 
Construction, EMF equation, ratings, phasor d iagram on no load and full load, equivalent 
circuit, regulation and efficiency calculations, open and short circuit tests, auto -
transformers; DC Machines: Construction, EMF and Torque equations, Characteristics of 
DC generators and motors, speed control of  DC motors and DC motor starters; Electrical 
Measuring Instruments: DC PMMC instruments, shunt and multipliers, multimeters, 
Moving iron ammeters and voltmeters, dynamometer, wattmeter, AC watthour meter, 
extension of instrument ranges.   
 
Text/Reference Books:  
1. 1. E. Hughes , “Electrical Technology,”  Pearson Education, 2010.  
2. 2. V. Del Toro,  “Electrical Engg Fundamentals,”  PHI Learning, 2009.  
3. 3. I. J. Nagrath and D. P. Kothari, ‘ Basic Electrical Engineering’  TATA Mc Graw Hill 
Education, 2009.  
4. 4. D. A. Bell,  “Electric Circuits,”  7th Ed., Oxford Higher Education, 2009.  
 
Subject Code: 
CS1L001  Name: Introduction to Programming 
and Data Structure  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
Digital computer fundamentals, concepts of algorithms and introduction to programming 
– examples; Constants and variables – data types, operators and expressions - type 
conversions, types of expressions; Assignment statements, input -output statements - 
concepts of data formats; Control statements: branching – if-else statemen ts; iteration – 
while, do -while, for statements. nested control structures, switch, break and continue 
statements; Functions and recursion – examples; concepts of parameter passing by 
values and by reference; Arrays – single and multidimensional, examples – searching 
and sorting; Introduction to pointers, character strings and arrays, pointers and arrays; 
Structures, linked lists, dynamic allocation, stacks and queues, binary trees and tree 
traversals; Data files – creating, opening, closing and operating d ata files; (The 
programming language C to be used as the basis language).  
Text Books:  
1. 1. B. Gottfried, “ Schaum’ s   Programming with C ,” Tata McGraw -Hill. 
2. 2. E. Balaguruswamy, “ Programming in ANSI C ,” Tata McGraw -Hill. 
3. 3. Y.  Kanetkar, “ Let us C ,” BPB Publications.  
4. 4. S. Lipschutz, “ Data Structures, Schaum’s Outlines Series ,” Tata McGraw -Hill. Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
11 
 Reference Books:  
1. 1. Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis M. Ritchie, “ The C Programming Language ,” Prentice 
Hall of India.  
2. 2. Ellis Horowitz, Satraj Sahni and Susan Anderson -Freed, “ Fundamentals of Data 
Structures in C ,” W. H. Freeman and Company.  
 
Subject Code: 
ME1P001  Name: Introduction to 
Manufacturing Processes  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit: 2  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
Machining:  
 Introducing to various machine tools and demonstration on machining  
 Making a steel pin as per drawing by machining in centre lathe  
 External screw thread on lathe  
 Making a cast iron Vee block by shaping  
 Making a regular polygon prism (MS)/ hexagon by milling machine  
 Slot fitting by milling machine  
 Study of machining in machining in machining centre (CNC)  
 Study of Electro discharge machining (EDM)  
Foundry Practice:     
 Orientation, demonstration and practice on metal casting  
 Practicing sand moulding using split and uneven parting line pattern  
 Practice on CO2 moulding and machine moulding  
 Mechanised sand preparation and melting practice  
Welding Practice:  
 Practice on electric arc welding  
 Practice on oxy -acetylene gas welding  
 Introduction and demonstration on submerged arc welding  
Metal Forming:   
Demonstration of deep drawing and other forming process   
 
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Chapman W.A.J.,  Workshop Technology - Part I , CBS Publishers.  
2. Chapman W.A.J.,  Workshop Technology - Part II , CBS Publishers.  
3. Hajra Choudhury S.K.,  Elements of workshop  Technology Vol. I , Media Promoters.  
4. Hajra Choudhury S.K.,  Elements of workshop Technology Vol. II , Media Promoters.  
 
 
 
Subject Code:   
CE1P001  Subject Name: Engineering Drawing  
and Graphics  L-T-P: 1-
0-3 Credit: 3  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
12 
 Introduction to  IS code of drawing; Conics and Engineering Curves – ellipse, parabola, 
hyperbola, cycloid, trochoid, involute; Projection of lines – traces, true length; Projection of 
planes and solids; sold objects – cube, prism, pyramid, cylinder, cone and sphere; 
Projection on Auxiliary planes; Isometric projection, isometric scale; Section of solids – true 
shape of section; Introduction to CAD tools – basics; Introduction of Development and 
Intersection of surfaces.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Bhatt N.D. Elementary Engineering Drawing , Charotar Publishing House.  
2. Gill P.S. Engineering Drawing & Engg. Graphics , S. K. Kataria & Sons.  
3. Lakshminarayan L.V.   and Vaish R.S. Engineering Graphics , Jain Brothers.  
Subject Code:   
PH1P001  Subject Name:   Physics Laboratory  L-T-P: 0-
0-3 Credit: 2  
Pre-Requisite(s): Nil  
1. To determine the damping constant of the pendulum for different eddy damping current.  
2. To verify Malus’s Law of polarization of light.  
3. To determine the wave length of the prominent lines of mercury source by a plane 
transmission diffraction grating and to calculate the resolving power and dispersive power of 
the grating.  
4. To study the intensity distribution of Fraunhofer diffraction pattern by a single slit and 
measure the width of the slit for a given wavelength of la ser light.  
5. To determine the wavelength of the given source using the Michelson interferometer.  
6. To determine the wave length of the given source using Fresnel’s biprism.  
7. To find out the resonance and beat time period of the coupled pendulum and find out the  
spring constant.  
8. To study the interference pattern and determine the radius of curvature of the plano convex 
lens using Newton’s rings apparatus.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. 1. Ghatak  A. Optics , McGraw -Hill. 
2. 2. Pain H. J.  The Physics of Vibrations and Waves , Wiley.  
 
Subject Code: 
CY1P001  Subject Name: Chemistry 
Laboratory  L-T-P: 0-
0-3 Credit: 2  
Prerequisite(s): Nil  
Experiment -1: Determination of the surface tension and parachor of a homologous 
series.  
Experiment -2: Measurement of the coefficient of viscosity of ethanol & ethanol -water 
system.  
Experiment -3: Studies on acid -base conductometric titration.  
Experiment - 4: Studies on PH metric titration of strong base with strong acid.  
Experiment -5: Estimation of sulphate ion in tap water by nepheloturb idimetric analysis.  
Experiment - 6: Spectrophotometric determination of acid dissociation constant (pka) of 
methyl red (MR) an acid base indicator.  
Experiment -7: Determination of solubility and solubility product of a sparingly soluble 
salt at room temper ature by conductometric method.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
13 
 Experiment - 8: Potentiometric titration of a given sodium carbonate solution with 
aquesous hydrochloric acid solution.  
Experiment -9:  kinetics of ester hydrolysis.  
Experiment -10: Detection of functional groups in an organi c compound for solid sample.  
Experiment -11:  Detection of functional groups in an organic compound for liquid 
sample.  
Experiment -12: Thin layer chromatography (TLC).  
 
Text/Reference Books:  
1. 1. Nad, A. K.; Mahapatra, B. and Ghoshal A.  An advanced course in practical chemistry , 
New Central Book Agency (P) Ltd.  
2. 2. Elias A. J.  A collection of general chemistry experiments , University Press.  
3. 3. Maity S. and Ghosh N.  Physical Chemistry Practical , New Central Book Agency (P) Ltd.  
 
Subject Code: 
EE1P001  Subject Name: Electrical 
Technology Laboratory  L-T-P: 0-
0-3 Credits: 2  
Prerequisite(s): Electrical Technology  
Experiments as per the topics in the syllabus for the course `Electrical Technology’ 
(EE1L001) will be conducted in the laboratory class.  
Text Books:  
1. E. Hughes,  “Electrical Technology,”  Pearson Education, 2010.  
2. V. Del Toro, “Electrical Engg Fundamentals,” PHI Learning, 2009.  
Reference Books:  
1. 1. I. J. Nagrath and D. P. Kothari, ‘ Basic Electrical Engineering’  TATA McGraw Hill 
Education, 2009.  
2. 2. D. A. Bell,  “Electric Circuits,”  7th Ed., Oxford Higher Education, 2009.  
 
Subject Code: 
CS1P001  Subject Name: Introduction to 
Programming and Data Structures 
Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit: 2  
Prerequisite(s): Introduction to Programing and Data Structures  
Familiarization of a computer and the environment; Execution of sample programs 
related to Expression evaluation, Conditionals and branching, Iteration, Functions, 
Recursion, Tail -recursion, Arrays, String manipulation, Structures, Linked lists, Doubly -
linked lists and Binary Trees. Execution of programs involving abstract data types like 
Stacks and Queues.  
 
Semester -II 
Subject Code:   
MA1L002  Subject Name: Mathematics -
II L-T-P: 3-
1-0 Credit: 4  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
14 
 Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
Linear Algebra:  Vector spaces, subspaces, span,   Linear dependence, independence of 
vectors, basis, dimension,   linear transformations, range, kernel, rank, nullity of linear 
transformation, space of all linear transformations, Operator equations, matrix 
associated with a linear map, li near map associated with a matrix, elementary row 
operations, solution of algebraic equations, consistency conditions. Matrix inversion by 
row operations, Eigenvalues and eigenvectors, Hermitian and skew Hermitian matrices, 
orthogonal and unitary matrices,  application to reduction of quadrics.   
Complex Analysis:  Limit, continuity, differentiability and analyticity of functions 
Cauchy -Riemann equations (cartesian and polar), Harmonic functions,   Elementary 
complex functions, Line integrals, upper bounds for moduli of contour integrals, Cauchy’s 
integral theorem, Cauchy’s integral formula, derivatives of analytic functions, Power 
series, Taylor’s series, Laurent’s series, Zeros and singularities, Residue theorem, 
evaluation of improper integrals by residue the orem.   
 
Text books:  
1.   Strang G.  Linear Algebra and its applications, Cengage Learning  
2.   Churchill R.V. and Brown J.W.  Complex Variables and Applications , Mc-Graw Hill  
3.   Kreyszig E.  Advanced Engineering Mathematics , John Wiley & Sons   
 
Reference Bo oks: 
J1. ain  R. K. and Iyengar S. R. K.  Advanced Engineering Mathematics , Narosa  
1. 2. Krishnamurthy V., Mainra V. P. and Arora J.L.   An Introduction to Linear Algebra , 
Affiliated East -West Press Pvt Ltd New Delhi  
2. 3. Axler S.  Linear Algebra Done Right , UTM, Springer  
3. 4. Poole D.  Linear Algebra : A Modern Introduction , Brooks/Cole  
 
All other courses are same as Semester -I Courses.  
  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
15 
 B. Tech  (Civil Engineering)  and Dual Degree (B.Tech. Civil Engineering and 
M.Tech.  Structural/Transportation/Environmental Engineering)  
Curriculum (3rd Semester – 6th Semester)  
SEMESTER - III  
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Introduction to Material Science and Engineering  ID2L001  2-0-0 2 2  
Introduction to Bioscience and Technology  ID2L002  2-0-0 2 2  
Basic Electronics   3-1-0 4 4  
Probability, Statistics & Stochastic Processes 
(Mathematics – 3) MA2L003  3-1-0 4 4  
Solid Mechanics  CE2L001  3-1-0 4 4 17 
Surveying  CE2L002  3-0-0 3 3 17 
Basic Electronics Laboratory   0-0-3 2 3  
Surveying Practice  CE2P00 2 0-0-3 2 3 17 
Project Seminar  CE2S001  0-0-0 2 0  
  Total  25 25  
SEMESTER – IV 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Lateral 1    3/4 3/4  
Breadth -1   3/4 3/4  
Environmental Science, Technology and 
Management  2-0-0 2 2  
Introduction to Civil Engineering and Construction 
Materials  CE2L003  3-0-0 3 3 18 
Structural Analysis  CE2L004  3-1-0 4 4 18 
Hydraulics  CE2L005  3-1-0 4 4 18 
Transportation Engineering  CE2L006  3-0-0 3 3 19 
Transportation Engineering Laboratory  CE2P00 1 0-0-3 2 3 19 
  Total  24/26  25/27   
SEMESTER - V 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Lateral 2    3/4 3/4  
Breadth -2    3 3  
Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures  CE3L001  3-1-0 4 4 19 
Soil Mechanics  CE3L002  3-1-0 4 4 19-20 
Water Resources Engineering  CE3L003  3-0-0 3 3 20 
Structural Engineering Laboratory  CE3P001  0-0-3 2 3 20 
Soil Mechanics Laboratory  CE3P002  0-0-3 2 3 20 
Water Resources Engineering  Laboratory  CE3P003  0-0-3 2 3 21 
  Total  23/24  26/27   
  ID2L003Type your textIndian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
16 
 SEMESTER - VI 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Lateral 3    3 3  
Breadth - 3   3 3  
Design of Steel Structures  CE3L004  3-0-0 3 3 21 
Foundation Engineering  CE3L005  3-0-0 3 3 21 
Water and Wastewater Engineering  CE3L006  3-1-0 4 4 21-22 
Civil Engineering Drawing and Estimation  CE3P004  0-0-3 2 3 22 
Structural Design and Detailing  CE3P005  0-0-6 4 6 22 
Water and Wastewater Engineering Laboratory  CE3P006  0-0-3 2 3 22 
  Total  24 28  
INDUSTRIAL SUMMER TRAINING AFTER 6th SEMESTER  
 
  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
17 
 B. Tech (Civil Engineering) and Dual Degree (B.Tech. Civil Engineering and 
M.Tech. Structural/Transportation/Environmental Engineering)  
Syllabus (3rd Semester – 6th Semester)  
SEMESTER – III 
Subject Code: 
CE2L001  Name: Solid Mechanics  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit:  4  
Prerequisite: None  
Stress analysis: forces and moments, theory of stress, principal stresses and stress 
invariants, compatibility equations, equilibrium equations; Strain analysis: deform ation and 
velocity gradients, Lagrangian and Eulerian description andfinite strain, small deformation 
theory, principal strains and strain invariants, compatibility conditions; Bending of Symmetric 
and non -symmetric sections; Thick cylinders and pressure v essels; Introduction of theory of 
elasticity Simple problems (semi -inverse method);Theories of failure; Stress concentration; 
Fatigue; Creep and relaxation.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Kazioni, S.M.A., Solid Mechanics, Tata McGraw Hill,   
2. Popoo, E.P., Introduction to Mechanics of Solids, Prentice Hill of India  
3. Crandall, S.H., Dahl, N.C., Lardner, T.J. and Sivakumar, M.S., An Introduction to 
Mechanics of Solids, Tata McGraw Hill  
4. Jindal, U. C., Strength of Materials, Pearson  
5. Timoshenko, Strength of Materi als, CBS  
Subject Code: 
CE2L002  Name: Surveying  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit:  3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction and basic principles of surveying; elements of surveying and mapping, concept 
of triangulation; measurement of horizontal distances (chain surveying)  and correction; 
plane table surveying; compass surveying; traversing; measurement of vertical distances 
(levelling); contouring; theodolite surveying ; computation of area and volume; curve setting; 
Basics of total station, global positioning system (GPS),  introduction to remote sensing (RS) 
and Geographical Information System (GIS).  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Punmia, B.C., Jain, A.K. and Jain, A.K. Surveying Vol. I, II and III, Laxmi Publication Pvt. 
Ltd. 
2. Arora, K. R., Surveying Vol. I, II and III, Standard Boo k House.  
3. Gopi, S., Sathikumar, R. and Madu, N., Advanced Surveying: Total Station, GIS and 
Remote Sensing, Pearson Education India.  
4. Subramanian, R.S. Surveying and levelling, Second Edition, Oxford Univ. Press.  
Subject Code: 
CE2P002  Name: Surveying Practice  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit:  2  
Prerequisite: None  
Chaining, offsets, field book entry, triangulation/traversing, plane table surveying, compass 
surveying, levelling using auto/dumpy -level instrument, level book entry, preparation of 
contour map, theodolite surveying for angular and linear measurements, surveying through 
total station equipment, setting out simple works.  
 
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Punmia, B.C., Jain, A.K. and Jain, A.K. Surveying Vol. I, II and III, Laxmi Publication Pvt. 
Ltd. 
2. Arora, K . R., Surveying Vol. I, II and III, Standard Book House.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
18 
 SEMESTER – IV 
Subject Code: 
CE2L003  Name: Introduction to Civil Engineering 
and Construction Materials  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit:  3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction to Civil Engineering; Major Divisions;  Civil Engineering Infrastructures; Ethics in 
Civil Engineering; Properties of construction material and their evaluation; test methods and 
specifications; Cement – chemical composition, properties such as setting, strength, 
fineness, hydration; Aggregates  – sources, properties, chemical reactivity; Concrete - 
constituents, proportioning, properties in fresh and hardened state, characteristic strength, 
quality control, transportation and placing, testing, porosity; Admixtures – chemical, mineral; 
Steel – properties, types of steel, steel in civil engineering; Bricks – manufacture, properties 
and classification; masonry bonds; Wood - Structure, defects & preservation; Paints, New 
materials – Fibre reinforced plastics (FRPs), epoxy -coated bars, Geo -synthetics etc., 
Construction methodologies and equipment.  
Text/Reference Books :  
1. Taylor, G.D., Materials of Construction, Prentice Hall  
2. Mehta P.K. and Montiero, P.M.J., Concrete – Material, Microstructure and Properties, Tata 
Mcgraw Hill  
3. Gambhir, M.L., Concrete Technology, Tata Mcgraw Hill  
4. Neville, A.M. and Brooks, J.J., Concrete Technology, ELBS/Longman  
5. Neville, A.M., Properties of Concrete, 4th Edition, ELBS/Longman  
6. Dayaratnam, P. Brick and Reinforced Brick Structures, Oxford and IBH  
7. Ghose, D.N., Construction Materials, Tata Mcgraw Hill  
8. Relevant IS codes for testing and specifications  
Subject Code: 
CE2L004  Name: Structural Analysis  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit:  4  
Prerequisite: None  
Stability and Determinacy of Structures; Analysis of Statically Determinate Structures; 
Review of shear force and bending moment diagrams in beams and frames; Plane trusses: 
Deflection of trusses; Deflection of beams and frames; Influence line diagrams and moving 
loads; Analysis of Statically Indeterminate Structures; Force and st iffness methods of 
analysis; Plane trusses by using method of consistent deformations, Beams and frames: 
Plane trusses by using direct stiffness method; Curved beams, arches and rings;  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Wang, C.K., Intermediate Structural Analysis, McGraw Hill  
2. Vazirani, V.N. and Ratwani, M.M., Analysis of Structures Vol -1, Vol -2, Khanna Publishers  
3. Ramamrutham, S. and Narayan, R., Theory of Structures, Dhanpat Rai  
Subject Code: 
CE2L005  Name: Hydraulics  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit:  4  
Prerequisite: None  
 
Basic properties of water; Determination of hydrostatic forces; Kinematics of flow; Potential 
flow; Continuity, Energy and Momentum principles; Open channel flow; Uniform and 
gradually varied flows; Dimensional analysis; Hydraulic similitude and Modelling;  Flow in 
pipes and Pipe networks; Hydraulics machines; Pumps and Turbines.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Subramanya, K., Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulic Machines, Tata McGraw Hill  
2. Kundu, P.K., Cohen, I.M. and Dowling, D.R., Fluid Mechanics, Academic Press, Elsevier  
3. White, F.M., Fluid Mechanics, Tata McGraw Hill  
4. Streeter, V.L., Fluid Mechanics, Tata McGraw Hill  
  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
19 
 Subject Code: 
CE2L006  Name: Transportation Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit:  3  
Prerequisite: None  
Different Modes of Transportation; Highway Development in India; Highway Alignment, 
Survey and Detailed Project Report; Geometric Design of Highways: cross -sectional 
elements, horizontal and vertical alignments; Elements of Traffic Engineering; Pavement 
Materials: subgrade soil, aggregates, bituminous binders; Pavement Design: design of 
flexible and rigid pavements, Elements of Highway Construction: embankment, subgrade, 
subbase and base courses, bituminous surface courses, concrete pavements, soil 
stabiliz ation; Drainage; Evaluation and Maintenance of highways.  
Text/Reference Books :  
1. Khanna, S. K.  and Justo, C.E.G., Highway Engineering, Nem Chand & Bros  
2. Kadiyali, L.R., Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning, Khanna Publishers  
3. Chakraborthy, P. and Das,  A., Principles of Transportation Engineering, Prentice Hall of 
India 
Subject Code: 
CE2P00 1 Name: Transportation Engineering 
Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit:  2  
Prerequisite: None  
Tests on Bitumen: Penetration Test, Viscosity Test, Ductility Test, Softening Point Test; Tests 
on Aggregates: Crushing test, Abrasion Test, Impact Test, Shape Test; CBR test on Soil, 
Dynamic Cone penetrometer Test, Roughness measurement of road surface, Traffic Studies: 
Classified Traffic Volume Count, Speed Studies etc.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Khanna, S. K.  and Justo, C.E.G., Highway Material Testing, Nem Chand & Bros.  
2. Khanna, S.K, Justo, A and Veeraragavan, A, Highway Materials and Pavement Testing, 
Nem Chand & Bros.  
3. Kadiyali, L. R., Traffic Engineering and Transportation  Planning, Khanna Publishers  
 
SEMESTER – V 
Subject Code: 
CE3L001  Name: Design of Reinforced Concrete 
Structures  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit:  4  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction to the design of Concrete structures: Structural Systems, Materials, Loadings 
and Structural Analysis, Working Stress Design, Ultimate Load Design, Limit State Design; 
Working Stress Design: Beams for Bending Moment and Shear Force; Limit State Design: 
Beams for Bending Moment, Shear Force, Bond and Torsion. Axially and eccentrically lo aded 
Columns. Beam -Columns for combined compression and flexure. One and two -way Slabs, 
Structural Components: Isolated and Combined Footings; Lintels, Stair Cases, Retaining 
Walls.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Gambhir, M.L., Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures, PHI Learning  
2. Varghese, P.C., Limit State Design of Reinforced Concrete, PHI Learning  
3. Pillai, S.U.  and Menon, D., Reinforced Concrete Design, Tata McGraw Hill  
4. Punmia, B.C., Jain A.K. and Jain A.K., Reinforced Concrete Structures Vol -I and II, Laxmi 
Publications  
5. Park, R. and Pauley, T., Reinforced Concrete Structures, Willey International  
Subject Code: 
CE3L002  Name: Soil Mechanics  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit:  4  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction, formation of soils, index properties and classification of soils, soil compaction, 
proctor and modified compaction, field control of compaction, effective stress, stress point 
and stress path, soil -water -system - surface tension and capillari ty, Darcy’s law, permeability Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
20 
 of soils, methods of determining coefficient of permeability, seepage analysis, flow nets, 
piping, quick sand condition, compressibility and consolidation of soils, normally and over 
consolidated soil, time rate of consolidati on, determination of coefficient of consolidation, 
shear strength of soils, direct shear and triaxial tests, Mohr -Coulomb strength criterion, CU, 
CD and UU tests, pore pressures, Skempton’s pore pressure coefficients.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Murthy, V.N.S., Geotechnical Engineering: Principles and Practices of Soil Mechanics and 
Foundation Engineering by Marcel  Dekkar, Inc., USA  
2. Das, B.M., Principles of Geotechnical Engineering, PWS Publishing Company, Boston, 
USA. 
3. Terzaghi, K., Ralph B.P. and Mesri, G., Soi l Mechanics in Engineering Practice, John Wiely 
and Sons, Inc.  
4. Muniram, B., Soil Mechanics and Foundations, John Wiely and Sons, Inc.  
5. Lambe, T.W., Whitman, R.V., Soil Mechanics, John Wiely and Sons, Inc. Canada.  
6. Parry,  R.H.G., Mohr Circles, Stress Paths and Geotechnics, E & FN SPON publishers.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE3L003  Name: Water Resources Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit:  3  
Prerequisite: None  
Concepts of hydrologic cycle; Measurement and analysis of precipitation and runoff; 
Hydrograph analysis; Irrigation requirement of crops; Design of canals; Design and drawing 
of weirs and barrages; cross drainage works; Classification; analysis; design and drawing of 
Gravity and Earth dams; Design and drawing of spillways and ener gy dissipators.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Subramanya, K., Engineering Hydrology, Tata McGraw -Hill 
2. Garg, S.K., Irrigation Engineering and Hydraulic Structures, Khanna Publishers  
3. Chow, V.T.,  Maidment, D.R. and Mays, L.W., Applied Hydrology, Tata McGraw -Hill 
 
Subject Code: 
CE3P001  Name:  Structural Engineering Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit:  2  
Prerequisite: None  
Casting and load -deformation test of reinforced concrete and post tensioned beams; Cement 
test: Standard consistency, setting times, compressive strength, fineness and soundness; 
Aggregate Tests: Sieve analysis, Bulking of sand, Aggregate crushing value, Absorption, Unit 
weights; Tension test of MS, HYSD, HT bars: Yield/Proof stress, Ultimate Strength, Young’s 
modulus, percentage elongation; Compre ssive strength of bricks and Pre -conditioning; Load 
deformation testing of steel beam; Concrete mix design and slump test; Demonstration of 
flow table, compacting factor and V.B. tests; Compressive strength of cubes by Non -
Destructive Testing; Dynamics of SDOF, MDOF systems; Indirect tensile strength of 
cylinders.  
Subject Code: 
CE3P002  Name: Soil Mechanics Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit:  2  
Prerequisite: None  
Specific gravity test, sieve analysis, hydrometer analysis, Atterberg’s limits tests, Proctor 
compaction test, relative density of sand, in -situ density test, permeability tests, direct shear 
test, unconfined compression test, vane shear test, triaxial tes ts, consolidation test.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Lambe, T.W., Soil Testing for Engineers John Wiley & Sons Inc.  
2. Murthy, V.N.S., Geotechnical Engineering: Principles and Practices of Soil Mechanics and 
Foundation Engineering, Marcel  Dekkar, Inc., USA.  
3. Robert W.D., Soil Testing Manual: Procedures, Classification Data, and Sampling 
Practices, McGraw -Hill Professional.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
21 
 Subject Code: 
CE3P003  Name: Water Resources Engineering 
Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit:  2  
Prerequisite: CE2L005: Hydraulics  
Experiments on flow  measurements in open channels and pipes; verification of momentum 
and energy equations; hydraulic jump; measurement of hydrostatic and hydrodynamic 
forces; flow in open channels; specific energy  
 
SEMESTER – VI 
Subject Code: 
CE3L004  Name: Design of Steel Structures  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit:  3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction to Steel Structure Design: Structural Systems, Design Loads and Load 
Combinations, Rolled Sections and Built -up sections; Working Stress Design; Plastic Design; 
Limit State Design Methods;  Design of structural fasteners: rivets, bolts and welds. Simple 
and Eccentric Connections; Design of tension members; Design of compression members; 
Design of Built -up column using lacing and battening; Design of flexure members; Design of 
Beam -Column; De sign of Column Bases; Design of Plate Girder and Gantry Girder.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Subramanian, N., Design of Steel Structures, Oxford University Press  
2. Duggal, S.K., Limit State Design of Steel Structures, McGraw Hill  
3. Ram, K S, Design of Steel Structures, Pearson Education  
Subject Code: 
CE3L005  Name: Foundation Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit:  3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction, examples of foundation problems, site characterization, soil exploration, site 
investigation methods, in -situ tests,  Bearing capacity: general, local and punching shear 
failure, effect of size, shape, depth and water table, Settlement of foundations: elastic, 
consolidation and total settlement, Types of foundation: shallow and deep foundations, 
isolated, combined, mat e tc., contact pressure distribution, basics of design of shallow 
foundation, deep foundation type, load transfer mechanism in piles, pile capacity, laterally 
loaded pile, test pile and pile load test, efficiency of pile group, settlement of pile, earth 
pressure theories: Rankine’s theory, Coulomb’s theory, Stability analysis of earth retaining 
structures - gravity, cantilever, counterfort, Slope stability: finite slopes and infinite slopes, 
Bishop’s simplified method, method of slices.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Bowles, E., Foundation Analysis and Design by Joseph, McGraw Hill Higher, USA.  
2. Das, B. M., Principles of Foundation Engineering, Cengage Learning.  
3. Das, B. M., Principles of Geotechnical Engineering, Cengage Learning.  
4. Budhu, M., Soil mechanics and foundatio ns, Wiley Publishers, New Delhi.  
5. Murthy, V. N. S., Principles of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engg, UBSPD.  
6. Khan, I.H., A text book of Geotechnical Engg, Prentice Hall India.  
7. Gopal Ranjan & Rao, A. S. R. Basic and Applied Soil Mechanics, Wiley Eastern Ltd.  
8. Bowles, Joseph E. Foundation analysis and design, McGraw -Hill Publishers  
Subject Code: 
CE3L006  Name: Water and Wastewater Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit:  4  
Prerequisite: None  
General requirement for water supply, population forecasting and water demand, sources, 
intake, pumping and transportation of water; Physical, chemical and biological characteristics 
of water and their significance, Water quality criteria, Water borne dise ases, Natural 
purification of water sources. Engineered systems for water treatment: aeration, 
sedimentation, softening, coagulation, filtration, adsorption, ion exchange, and disinfection. 
Generation and collection of wastewater, quantities of sanitary wa stes and storm water. Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
22 
 Design of sewerage system Primary, secondary and tertiary treatment of wastewater; 
Wastewater disposal standards. Basics of microbiology. Biological wastewater treatment 
systems: Aerobic processes - activated sludge process and its mo difications, trickling filter, 
RBC, Anaerobic Processes - conventional anaerobic digester, High rate and hybrid anaerobic 
reactors. Sludge digestion and handling. Disposal of effluent and sludge Design problems on 
water and wastewater treatment units and sl udge digestion.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Peavy, H. S., Rowe, D. R. and Tchobanoglous, G., Environmental Engineering, McGraw -
Hill International Ed.  
2. McGhee, T. J, Water Supply and Sewerage, McGraw -Hill Inc.  
3. Davis, M. L and Cornwell, D. A, Introduction to Environmental Engineering, McGraw -Hill, 
Inc. 
4. Metcalf & Eddy, Wastewater Engineering - Treatment and Reuse (Revised by G. 
Tchobanoglous, F. L. Burton and H. D. Stensel), Tata McGraw Hill.  
5. Sawyer, C. N, McCarty, P. L and Parkin, G. F., Chemistry for Environme ntal Engineers, 
McGraw - Hill. 
6. APHA, Standard Methods Examination of Water and Wastewater, American Public Health 
Association, Washington DC.  
7. Manual for Sewer and Sewerage, Central Public Health & Environmental Engineering 
Organisation, Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, Govt. of India.  
8. Manual for water supply and treatment, Central Public Health & Environmental 
Engineering Organisation, Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, Govt. of India.  
Subject Code: 
CE3P004  Name: Civil Engineering Drawing and 
Estimation  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit:  2  
Prerequisite: None  
Building drawing: Components of buildings - Plan, elevation and section of buildings; Hands 
on Practice using AutoCAD or Solid Works, Estimation: Central line method, short wall - long 
wall method,  units of measurement, Rate analysis, Cost estimation for buildings and other 
structures.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Malik, R.S. and Meo, G.S. Civil Engineering Drawing, Computech Publications Limited  
2. Dutta, B.N., Estimating and Costing in Civil Engineering: Theory and Practice including 
Specification and Valuation, Sangam Books  
3. Chakraborti, M., Estimating, Costing, Specification, Valuation in Civil Engineering, 
Chakraborti  
Subject Code: 
CE3P005  Name: Structural Design and Detailing  L-T-P: 
0-0-6 Credit:  4  
Prerequisite: CE3L001: Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures  
Detailed Design of Multistoried RC Building and Detailing of RC Slabs, Beams, columns and 
footings; Design of Industrial Steel Building with Truss Roof and Detailing of Trusses, 
Gusseted Joint s, Eccentric Connections Riveted/Welded, Beam End Connections, Built -up 
Column; Design and detailing of Special Structures: Pile foundation, Water tank and 
Retaining wall.  
Subject Code: 
CE3P006  Name: Water and Wastewater Engineering 
Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit:  2  
Prerequisite: None  
Physical characteristics of water - Turbidity, Taste, Odor, Colour, Electrical conductivity; 
Analysis of solids content of water - Dissolved, settleable, suspended, total, volatile, 
inorganic;; Alkalinity and acidity; Hardness - Total, calcium and magnesium; Analysis of ions 
- Fluoride, copper, arsenic; Optimum coagulant dose; Break point chlorination; Settling 
column analysis for sedimentation tank design; BOD and BOD rate constant determination; 
COD; DO and re -aeratio n constant determination; Bacteriological quality measurement: MPN, 
plate count  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
23 
  
B. Tech (Civil Engineering)  
Curriculum (7th Semester – 8th Semester)  
SEMESTER - VII 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Breadth - 4   3/4 3/4  
Elective – 1 CE4LXXX   3 3  
Elective – 2 CE4LXXX   3 3  
Elective – 3 CE4LXXX   3 3  
CAD Laboratory  CE4P001  0-0-3 2 3 25 
Summer Training  CE4T001  0-0-3 2 3  
Project – Part 1 (CE)  CE4D001  0-0-6 4 6  
  Total  20/21  24/25   
SEMESTER - VIII  
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Elective – 4 CE4LXXX   3 3  
Elective – 5 CE4LXXX   3 3  
Elective – 6 CE4LXXX   3 3  
Elective – 7 CE4LXXX   3/4 3/4  
Project – Part 2 (CE)  CE4D002  0-0-9 6 9  
  Total  18/19  21/22   
 
List of Elective Courses  
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Elective – I and VII  
Construction Management  CE4L001  3-0-0 3 3 25 
Air Pollution and Solid Waste Management  CE4L002  3-0-0 3 3 25 
Advanced Transportation Engineering  CE4L003  3-0-0 3 3 26 
Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling  CE4L004  3-0-0 3 3 26 
Maintenance and Rehabilitation of 
Concrete Structures  CE4L005  3-0-0 3 3 26 
Computational Hydraulics  CE4L006  3-0-0 3 3 27 
Water Resources Management  CE4L007  3-0-0 3 3 27 
Hydraulic and Hydrologic Analysis and 
Design  CE4L008  3-0-0 3 3 27 
Hydropower Engineering  CE4L009  3-0-0 3 3 28 
Elective – II 
Structural Dynamics  CE4L021  3-0-0 3 3 28 
Bridge Engineering  CE4L022  3-0-0 3 3 29 
Pre-stressed Concrete  CE4L023  3-0-0 3 3 29 
Earthquake Engineering  CE4L024  3-0-0 3 3 29 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
24 
 Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Elective – III 
Environmental Engineering  CE4L031  3-0-0 3 3 29 
Environmental Impact Assessment  CE4L032  3-0-0 3 3 30 
Sustainable Water and Sanitation System  CE4L033  3-0-0 3 3 31 
Environmental System Management  CE4L034  3-0-0 3 3 32 
Industrial Pollution Prevention  CE4L035  3-0-0 3 3 31 
Elective – IV 
Soil Dynamics  CE4L041  3-0-0 3 3 32 
Advanced Foundation Engineering  CE4L042  3-0-0 3 3 32 
Numerical Methods in Geotechnical 
Engineering  CE4L043  3-0-0 3 3 32 
Soil Engineering  CE4L044  3-0-0 3 3 33 
Earth Retaining Structures  CE4L045  3-0-0 3 3 33 
Elective – V 
Remote Sensing and GIS  CE4L051  3-0-0 3 3 34 
River Engineering  CE4L052  3-0-0 3 3 34 
Open Channel Hydraulics  CE4L053  3-0-0 3 3 34 
Water Resources Systems  CE4L054  3-0-0 3 3 35 
Design of Hydraulic Structures  CE4L055  3-0-0 3 3 35 
Elective – VI 
Transportation Planning  CE4L061  3-0-0 3 3 35 
Pavement Design  CE4L062  3-0-0 3 3 36 
Traffic Engineering  CE4L063  3-0-0 3 3 36 
 
  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
25 
 Syllabus (7th Semester – 8th Semester)  
SEMESTER - VII  
Subject Code: 
CE4P001  Name: CAD Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit:  2  
Prerequisite: None  
Exposure to commercial software tools for analysis, design and research in civil engineering.  
 
Elective Courses  
SEMESTER – VII & VIII  
Elective I & VII  
Subject Code: 
CE4L001  Name: Construction Management  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Construction Management Overview; Construction Industry; Construction Projects 
Management; Scheduling Techniques for Construction Projects; Construction Estimating; 
Construction Cost Control; Construction Contracts Administration; Construction Practice  
Text/Reference Books :  
1. Jha, Neeraj Kumar, Construction Project Management, Pearson Education India  
2. Williams, Trefor, Construction Management, Pearson Education India  
3. Chitkara, Krishnan, Construction Project Management Techniques And Practice, Tata 
McGraw Hill  
4. Purifoy R.L., Construction Planning, equipments and Methods, Mc Graw Hill, Tokyo, Japan.   
Subject Code: 
CE4L002  Name: Air Pollution and Solid Waste 
Management  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Air pollution: Pollutants, their sources, harmful effects on environment, metrology and 
atmospheric diffusion of pollutants, dispersion modeling, air sampling and pollutant 
measurement methods, ambient air quality and emission standards, control, removal of 
gaseous pollutants, particulate emission control, control of automobile pollution.  
Solid waste management: Engineering principles; Sources, Composition and Properties of 
Municipal Solid Waste, Onsite handling, storage and pro cessing, Collection, Transfer and 
transport, Recovery of resources, Conversion products and energy, Disposal of solid waste 
including sanitary landfill. Introduction to biomedical and hazardous waste management.  
 
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Peavy, H. S., Rowe, D. R. and Tchobanoglous, G., Environmental Engineering, McGraw -Hill 
International Ed.  
2. Rao, M N,  Air Pollution, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi.  
3. Garg, S. K., Sewage Disposal and Air Pollution Engineering, Khanna Publication.  
4. Nevers, N. D. Air Pollution Control  Engineering, Mc. Graw Hill International Ed.  
5. Tchobanoglous, G., Theisen, H., and Vigil, S.A., Integrated Solid Waste Management:  
Principles and Management Issues, McGraw Hill Book Company.  
6. LaGrega, M.D., Buckingham, P.L., and Evans, J.C., Hazardous Waste  Management, 
McGraw -Hill International Editions.  
7. Martin, E.J.  and Johnson, J.H.,  Hazardous Waste Management Engineering, van Nostrand -
Reinhold.  
8. Wentz, C.A., Hazardous Waste Management, McGraw Hill.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
26 
 9. Wark K, Warner, C F and Davis, W. Air Pollution Its Orig in and Control, Harper and Row  
10. Griffin, R D, Principles of Air Quality Management, CRC Press.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L003  Name: Advanced Transportation 
Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Airports: introduction; characteristics of aircrafts related to airport design; obstruction 
clearance criteria; design of airside facilities: runway orientation, length, capacity, 
configuration and number, taxiway  layout, design of fillets, high -speed exit taxiway, apron 
gate and circulation areas, hanger; d esign of landside facilities: terminal building  functional 
areas and facilities, centralized and de -centralized concepts, vertical distribution; airport 
planning and site selection; pavement design; visual aids; demand estimation of air travel, 
drainage. R ailways: - Introduction, classification of routes; railway gauge, coning of wheels and 
canting of rails, train resistance and hauling power; track components: rails, sleepers, 
fastenings, ballast and formation; track stresses; turnouts and crossings, signal s and control 
systems, welded rails. Elements of water and pipeline transportation. Economic Analysis of 
Transportation Projects  
Book:  
1. Horonjeff, Robert, Planning and Design of Airports, McGraw Hill  
2. Chandra, Satish and Agarwal, M.M., Railway Engineering, Oxford University Press India  
3. Garber, NJ and Hoel, LA, Principles of Traffic and Highway Engineering, Cengage Learning  
Subject Code: 
CE4L004  Name: Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction - objective, scope and  problems of Rock Mechanics. Classification by origin, 
Lithological, Engineering. Rock exploration - rock coring, geophysical methods. Laboratory 
testing of rocks - all types of compressive strength, tensile strength and flexural strength 
tests. Strength a nd failure of rocks, Griffith’s theory, Coulombs theory, rheological methods. 
In-situ tests on rock mass. Deformation characteristics of rocks, instrumentation and 
measurement of deformation of rocks. Permeability characteristics - interstitial water on ro cks, 
unsteady flow of water through jointed rock mass. Mechanical, thermal and electrical 
properties of rock mass. Correlation between laboratory and field properties. Analysis of 
stresses. Thick wall cylinder, formulae, Kreish equation, Green span method.  Openings in rock 
mass and stresses around openings. Pressure tunnels, development of plastic zone. Rock 
support needed to avoid plastic deformation. Lined and unlined tunnels. Underground 
excavation and subsidence. Rock mechanics applications. Bearing cap acity of homogeneous as 
well as discontinuous rocks. Support pressure and slip of the joint. Delineation of types of rock 
failure. Unsupported span of underground openings, pillars. Rock slopes. Rock bolting. Plastic 
mechanics. Tunnels, shapes, usages, Met hods of Construction, Problems associated with 
tunnels, tunnelling in various subsoil conditions and rocks.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Goodman, R. E., Introduction to Rock Mechanics, John Wiley and Sons.  
2. Hudson, J.A. and Harrison, J.P. Engineering rock Mechanics: an introduction to the 
principles, Pergamon publishers.  
3. Chapman, David, Metje, Nicole and Stärk, Alfred, Introduction to Tunnel Construction. 
Spon Publishers, Taylor and Francis Group.  
4. Brady, B. H. G. and Brown, E. T. Rock Mechanics: for undergr ound mining, Kluwer 
Academic Publishers.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L005  Name: Maintenance and Rehabilitation of 
Concrete Structures  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Maintenance and Repair strategies - Maintenance, repair and rehabilitation, Facets of 
Maintenance, importance of Maintenance various aspects of Inspection, Assessment procedure 
for evaluating a damaged structure, causes of deterioration; Serviceability and  Durability of Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
27 
 Concrete - Quality assurance for concrete construction concrete properties - strength, 
permeability, thermal properties and cracking. - Effects due to climate, temperature, 
chemicals, corrosion - design and construction errors - Effects of co ver thickness and cracking; 
Materials and Techniques for Repair - Special concretes and mortar, concrete chemicals, 
special elements for accelerated strength gain, Expansive cement, polymer concrete, sulphur 
infiltrated concrete, Ferrocement and polymers c oating for rebars loadings from concrete, 
mortar and dry pack, vacuum concrete, Gunite and Shotcrete, Epoxy injection, Mortar repair 
for cracks shoring and underpinning. Methods of corrosion protection, corrosion inhibitors, 
corrosion resistant steels and cathodic protection.; Repairs to Structures - Repair of structures 
distressed due to earthquake – Strengthening using FRP Strengthening and stabilization 
techniques for repair.  
Text/Reference Books :  
1. Denison Campbell, Allen and Harold Roper, Concrete Struc tures, Materials, Maintenance 
and Repair, Longman Scientific and Technical UK.  
2. Allen R.T and Edwards S.C, Repair of Concrete Structures, Blakie and Sons, UK.  
3. Raikar, R.N., Learning from failures - Deficiencies in Design, Construction and Service - 
R&D Cent re (SDCPL), Raikar Bhavan, Bombay.  
4. Santhakumar A.R., Concrete Technology, Oxford University Press, Printed in India by 
Radha Press, New Delhi.  
5. Emmons, Peter H., Concrete Repair and Maintenance Illustrated Galgotia Publications pvt. 
Ltd. 
Subject Code: 
CE4L006  Name: Computational Hydraulics  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
General numerical methods; Introduction to FEM, FDM and BEM; Perturbation method; 
Methods of characteristics; Hydroinformatics; Applications to water resources engineering  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Michael B. Abbott, Anthony W. Minns, Computational Hydraulics.  
2. Cornelis B. Vreugdenhil, Computational Hydraulics.  
3. Ioana Popescu, Computational Hydraulics.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L007  Name: Water Resources Management  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Water resources economics; Water resources conservation techniques; Optimization in water 
resources engineering; Irrigation management; Reservoir management; Sustainable water 
resources development; Environmental impact assessment of wa ter resources projects.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Feldman, Dave Water Resources Management.  
2. Nageswara Rao, K., Water Resources Management.  
3. Lenton, Roberto L., Muller, Mike, Integrated Water Resources Management in Practice.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L008  Name: Hydraulic and Hydrologic Analysis 
and Design  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Synthetic design storms & Estimation of peak discharge, Urban storm drainage design, Culvert 
design, Detention storage design, Flood frequency analysis; Design of water  distribution 
network, Analysis and design of mobile and rigid boundary channels, Tractive force concepts in 
channel design, Design of canal headworks, distribution works, and cross -drainage works, 
Design of gravity dams, spillways, and energy dissipators.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Ben C. Yen, Yeou -Koung Tung, Reliability and Uncertainty Analyses in Hydraulic Design: A 
Report, American Society of Civil Engineers  
2. Bruce E. Larock, Roland W. Jeppson, Gary Z. Watters, Hydraulics of Pipeline Systems, CRC Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
28 
 Press  
3. Ghosh , Karunamoy, Analysis and Design Practice of Hydraulic Concrete Structures, PHI 
Learning Pvt. Ltd  
4. Chow, Ven Te, Maidment, David R. and Mays, Larry W., Applied Hydrology, Tata McGraw -
Hill Education  
 
Subject Code: 
CE4L009  Name: Hydropower Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Power generation through storage (dams) and diversion (barrages); run -of the river schemes 
with and without pondage; integrated powerhouse with barrage / on diversion channel; 
pumped storage schemes; tidal power plants;  hydroelectric plant layouts for open flow 
diversion schemes and pressure diversion system or their combinations; underground projects 
with pressure diversion systems; position of power house (surface, underground or semi - 
underground); hydropower conveyan ce structures intakes, conveyance structures and outflow 
structures; intakes to canals and tunnels (with corresponding de -silting arrangements); 
intakes for in -stream powerhouses; reservoir type intakes, trash rack and its design; intakes 
for embankment da ms; water conducting systems open channels, fore -bays, tunnels, surge 
tanks, penstocks, valves and anchor blocks; layout and sections of tunnels; tunnel deign 
basics; construction methods for tunnels; penstock components (bends, reducer, branches, 
manifold s); turbine foundations and overhead traveling crane frame; underground powerhouse 
cavern; types of turbines and their selection.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Subramanya, K., Flow in open channels, Tata McGraw -Hill Education  
2. Garg, S. K., Irrigation Engineering an d Hydraulic Structures, Khanna Publishers  
3. Subramanya, K., Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulic Machines, Tata McGraw -Hill Education  
4. Daugherty, Robert Long, Hydraulic Turbines, McGraw -Hill 
 
 
Elective II  
Subject Code: 
CE4L021  Name: Structural Dynamics  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 
 Credit: 3  
 
Prerequisite: None  
Single -degree -freedom systems: undamped and damped free vibration; Response to harmonic 
and periodic excitations; Response to non -periodic excitations; Numerical evaluation of 
dynamic response; Generalized single -degree -freedom systems. Elements of analytical 
dynamics: The principle of virtual work; Principle of D Alembert; Hamiltons principle; 
Lagrange’s equation. Multi -degree -freedom systems: Equation of motion; undamped free 
vibration; Intepretation of modal orthogonality ; Decomposition of response in terms of modal 
co-ordinates; Modal analysis; Response to external excitations; Rayleigh’s quotient and its 
properties; Systems with proportional damping; Systems with arbitrary viscous damping. 
Distributed parameter systems: axial and bending vibration of beams; orthogonality of modes; 
Response to external excitations; Rayleigh s quotient; Approximate methods. Earthquake 
response of linear systems: Earthquake excitations; Equations of motion; Response spectrum 
concept; Respons e spectrum characteristics; Design response spectrum; Modal analysis; 
Displacement response; Element forces; Modal response contribution; Response history 
analysis; Response spectrum analysis.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Paz, M, Structural Dynamics, CBS Publisher  
2. Clough, R.W. and Penzin, J., Dynamics of Structures, Printice -Hall & Tata McGraw Hill  
3. Chopra, A K, Dynamics of Structures, Pearson Education  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
29 
 Subject Code: 
CE4L022   Name: Bridge Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Types of Bridges and loading standards. Hydraulic Design of Bridges, Foundation for piers and 
abutments, Open Foundation, Pile Foundation, Well Foundation, Bridge Substructure: Piers and 
Abutments. Bridge Superstructure: Design aspects, RC slab deck, Tee Beam and S lab deck. 
Composite Bridges. Pre -stressed concrete bridges, Steel trussed bridges; Bridge Construction, 
Inspection and Maintenance.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Ponnuswamy, S, Bridge Engineering, McGraw Hill  
2. Jagadeesh and Jayaram, Design of Bridge Structure, PHI Learning  
3. Victor, D. J., Essentials of Bridge Engineering, Oxford and IBH Publishing  
Subject Code: 
CE4L023  Name: Pre -stressed Concrete  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Concept on Mechanics; Materials; Properties of sections; Stress analysis - three methods; 
Prestressing and Post stressing; Beam design - no tension and ultimate; Poles and slab 
panels; Loss assessment; Composite beams; Design for shear. Large span structures; 
Structural forms and design principles; Special materials, open web and  built-up structures.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Lin and Burns, Design Of Prestressed Concrete Structures, Wiley India  
2. Dayaratnam, P Prestressed Concrete Structures, Oxford and IBH  
3. Raju, K., Prestressed Concrete Bridges, CBS  
Subject Code: 
CE4L024   Name: Earthquake Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Characteristics of earthquakes; Seismic Hazards, Earthquake response of structures; 
Mechanisms of earthquake generation and propagation, Magnitude and Intensity of an 
earthquake. Response of  SDOF and MDOF systems to Earthquake Loading. Geotechnical 
Failures Due to Earthquakes, Faulting, Liquefaction; Wave Propagation. Concept of Earthquake 
Resistant Design, Code provisions.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Duggal, S K, Earthquake Resistant Design of Str uctures, Oxford University Press  
2. Chopra, A K, Dynamics of Structures, Pearson  
3. Paulay and Priestley, Seismic Design of Reinforced Concrete and Masonry Buildings, Wiley 
International Publication  
4. Bolt, B A, Earthquakes, WH Freeman  & Company, New York  
5. Kramer, S L, Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering, Pearson  
6. Dutta, S C and Mukhopadhyay, P S, Improving Earthquake and Cyclone Resistance of 
Structures, TERI Delhi  
 
Elective III  
Subject Code: 
CE4L031  Name: Environmental Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Components of water supply systems, Water use and demand estimation, Design period, 
population data and flow rates for water supply systems, Factors affecting water consumption 
and variation in demand, Intakes, Transportation of water, P umping of water, Design of water 
distribution systems, methods of analysis for optimal distribution network design, Types of 
reservoirs and design parameters and methods, Water supply plumbing systems in buildings, 
Rural Water supply.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
30 
 Design principles of wastewater collection systems,  quantities of sanitary wastes and storm 
water, Estimation of dry weather flows, separate, combined and semi -combined sewers, Sewer 
pipe hydraulics, construction, maintenance and appurtenances for sewers, Pumping stations, 
sewage collection from buildings.  
Estimation, Handling, Storage, Collection, Transfer, Transport and Disposal of Solid waste  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Peavy, H. S., Rowe, D. R. and Tchobanoglous, G., Environmental Engineering, McGraw -Hill 
International.  
2. Garg, S.  K., Water Supply Engineering, Khanna Publication.  
3. Garg, S. K., Sewage Disposal and Air Pollution Engineering, Khanna Publication.  
4. McGhee, T. J., Water Supply and Sewerage, McGraw Hill International.  
5. Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Orga nization, Manual on Water 
Supply and Treatment, Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi.  
6. Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organization, Manual on Sewerage 
and Sewage Treatment, Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi.  
7. Quasim, S. R., Mo tley, E. M. and Zhu, G., Water Works Engineering - Planning, Design and 
Operation, Prentice Hall.  
8. Bhave, P. R. and Gupta, R., Analysis of Water Distribution Networks, Narosa publishing 
house, New Delhi.  
9. Bhave, P. R., Optimal Design Of Water Distribution Net works, Narosa publishing house, 
New Delhi., 2003  
Subject Code: 
CE4L032  Name: Environmental Impact Assessment  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Evolution of EIA; EIA at project; Regional and policy levels; Strategic EIA; EIA process; 
Screening and  scoping criteria; Rapid and comprehensive EIA. Legislative and environmental 
clearance procedures in India and other countries, Siting criteria; CRZ; Public participation; 
Resettlement and rehabilitation. Practical applications of EIA; EIA methodologies; Baseline 
data collection; Prediction and assessment of impacts on physical, biological and socio -
economic environment; Environmental management plan; Post project monitoring, EIA report 
and EIS; Review process. Case studies on project, regional and sectora l EIA. Specialised areas 
like environmental health impact assessment; Environmental risk analysis; Economic valuation 
methods; Cost -benefit analysis; Expert system and GIS applications; Uncertainties. EMP.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Canter, L., Environmental Im pact Assessment, McGraw Hill.  
2. Kiely, G., Environmental Engineering, Tata McGraw Hill.  
3. Rau, G. J. and Wooten, C. D., Environmental Impact Analysis Handbook, McGraw Hill.  
4. Munn, R. E., Environmental Impact Assessment, John Wiley & Sons.  
5. Dhameja, S. K., Envir onmental Engineering and Management, S. K. Kataria & Sons.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L033  Name: Sustainable Water and Sanitation 
Systems  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Concept of sustainability in water and waste management, Water Conservation, Rainwater 
Harvesting: Roof water harvesting, technology, quality, health issues, Groundwater recharge, 
techniques, case studies, Water tariff, sustainable water management. Decent ralised 
wastewater treatment systems, Reliability and cost effectiveness of wastewater systems, 
Tertiary treatment, process selection, granular - medium filtration, micro screening, removal of 
toxic compounds and refractory organics, removal of dissolved in organic substances, Natural 
Wastewater Treatment Systems, Natural and constructed wetlands, different types, 
Mechanisms, performance, design, case studies. Land treatment systems. Wastewater reuse 
and reclamation. Rural water supply and sanitation, Low -cost sanitation, Dry sanitation 
methods, Pit latrines, VIP latrines, Aquaprivy, septic tank, Organic solid waste management 
techniques, Composting/vermicomposting, biogas technology, plasma technology,  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
31 
 Text/Reference Books : 
1. Ahluwalia, P. and Nema, A. K., Water and Wastewater Systems: Source, Treatment, 
Conveyance and Disposal, S. K. Kataria & Sons.  
2. Arceivala, S. J. and Asolekar, S. R., Wastewater Treatment for Pollution Control and Reuse, 
Tata McGraw Hill.  
3. Cites, R. W., Middlebrooks, E. J., and Reed, S. C. , Natural Wastewater Treatment Systems, 
CRC Taylor and Francis.  
4. Cairncross, S. and Feachem, R., Environmental Health Engineering in the Tropics, John 
Wiley & Sons.  
5. Metcalf & Eddy, Wastewater Engineering - Treatment and Reuse (Revised by 
Tchobanoglous, G., B urton, F. L. and Stensel, H. D.), Tata McGraw Hill.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L034  Name: Environmental System Management  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Human - environment relationship, normative criteria, descriptive and prescriptive models, 
limits of  growth; Environmental and natural resources economics, pollution control policy, 
growth in a finite environment; Environmental protection laws; Numerical/mathematical 
modelling of environmental systems, subsystems, and pollutant transport processes; Plann ing 
and management of environmental systems: optimization techniques, stochastic modelling, 
statistical inferences; Large scale systems; Optimal monitoring network design, identification 
of sources; Risk reliability and uncertainty in environmental systems ; Topics in groundwater 
and surface water quality management.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Schnoor, J. L., Environmental Modelling, Wiley -interscience.  
2. Boubel, R. W., Fox, D. L., Turner, D. B. and. Stern, A. C., Fundamentals of Air Pollution, 
Academic Press, New York. 
3. Thomann, R. V., and Muller, J. A., Principles of Surface Water Quality Modelling and 
Control, Harper International Edition.  
4. Tchobanoglous, G., Schroeder, E. D., Water Quality, Addison – Wesley Publishing 
Company, Reading, Massachusetts.  
5. Welford, R., Corporate Environmental Management, Earthscan Publications Limited, 
London.  
6. Rosencranz, A., Divan, S. and Noble, M. L., Environmental Law and Policy in India : Cases, 
Materials and Statutes, Tripathi Pvt. Ltd, Bombay.  
7. Asolekar, S. R. and Gopichandran, R. , Preventive Environmental Management - An Indian 
Perspective Foundation Books Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi (The Indian Association of Cambridge 
University Press, UK).  
Subject Code: 
CE4L035  Name: Industrial Pollution Prevention  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Nature and characteristics of industrial wastes;  Prevention versus control of industrial 
pollution; Linkage between technology and pollution prevention; Tools for clean processes, 
reuse, recycle, recovery, source reduction, raw material substitution, toxic use reduction and 
process modifications;  Unit operations in separation technology ; Separation technologies as 
tools for waste minimization. Process optimization for cleaner industrial processes; Flow sheet 
analysis; Energy and resource  (material and water) audits for efficient usage and 
conservation; Waste audits, emission inventories and waste management hierarchy for 
process industries; Thermodynamic constraints to waste minimization ; Holistic and critical 
technology assessment; Envir onmental performance indicators; Concept of industrial ecology 
and symbiosis of eco -parks. Case studies  on industrial applications of cleaner technologies in 
chemical, metallurgical, pulp and paper, textile, electroplating, leather, dairy, cement and 
other  industries.  
Text/Reference Books : Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
32 
 1. Bishop, P. E., Pollution Prevention : Fundamentals And Practice, McGraw Hill.  
2. Freeman, H. M., Industrial Pollution Prevention Handbook, McGraw Hill, 1995.  
3. Allen, D. T., and Rosselot, K. S., Pollution Prevention for Chemical Processes, John Wiley.  
4. Allen, D. T., Bakshani, N., and Rosselot, K. S., Pollution Prevention: Homework and Design 
Problems for Engineering Curricula, American Institute for Pollution Pre vention.  
5. Johansson, A., Clean Technology, Lewis Publishers.  
6. Theodore, L. and McGuinn, Y. C., Pollution Prevention, Van Nostrand Reinhold, NewYork.  
7. Asolekar, S. R. and Gopichandran, R., Preventive Environmental Management - An Indian 
Perspective Foundati on Books Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi (The Indian Association of Cambridge 
University Press, UK).  
 
Elective IV  
Subject Code: 
CE4L041  Name: Soil Dynamics  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction, Fundamental of vibrations, dynamic properties of geomaterials, transient 
vibrations, analysis of free and forced   vibrations using spring dashpot model, single degree of 
freedom system, multidegrees of freedom system,  application of single a nd multidegree of 
freedom systems, wave propagation in elastic media, laboratory and field evaluation of soil 
properties, analysis of earthquake loadings, liquefaction analysis.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Saran, S., Soil Dynamics and Machine Foundations, Galgotia Publications.  
2. Das, B. M. and Ramana, G. V., Principles of Soil Dynamics, CL -Engineering.  
3. Richart, F. E., Woods, R. D., and Hall, J. R., Vibrations of Soils and Foundations, Prentice 
Hall. 
4. Kramer, S. L., Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering, Prentic e Hall.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L042  Name: Advanced Foundation Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Bearing capacity of shallow foundations: Prandtl, Terzaghi and Meyerhof s method of analysis, 
safe and allowable bearing pressures, selection of  type and depth of foundations, combined 
footings, mat foundations including floating raft, settlement calculations, Skempton - Bjerrum 
modification, and Martin s method, bearing capacity of layered soils, bearing capacity of 
footings on slopes, Deep found ations: mechanics of load transfer in piles, load carrying 
capacity, pile load test, lateral loaded piles, design of pile groups including settlement 
calculations, design of block foundation, well foundations, coffer dams, pier foundations, earth 
pressure computations on retaining walls and their design, earthquake response of 
foundations.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Das, B. M., Principles of Foundation Engineering, Cengage Learning.  
2. Budhu, M., Soil Mechanics and Foundations, Wiley Publishers, New Delhi.  
3. Coduto, D. P., Foundation Design: Principles and Practices, Prentice Hill Publishers.  
4. Holts, R. D. and Kovacs, W. D., An Introduction to Geotechnical Engineering, Prentice Hall.  
5. Das, B. M., Shallow Foundations: Bearing Capacity and Settlement, CRC Press.  
6. Tomilson,  M. J., Foundation Design and Construction, Pearson Publishers.   
Subject Code: 
CE4L043  Name: Numerical Methods in Geotechnical 
Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction to numerical modeling in Geotechnical Engineering, constitutive modeling, review 
of  basic concepts, solution of nonlinear systems of equations, finite difference method, finite 
element method, constitutive modeling of soil response, large def ormation – large strain 
analysis, applications: flow and consolidation, groundwater and seepage, slopes and cuts, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
33 
 embankments, shallow and deep foundations, retaining walls, tunnels and caverns and rock 
Mechanics  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Desai, C. S. and Christian, J. T., Numerical Methods in Geotechnical Engineering, McGraw -
Hill Publishers.  
2. Potts, D. M. and Zdravkovic, L., Finite Element Analysis in Geotechnical Engineering: 
Theory and Application, Thomas Telford Publishing.  
3. Benz, T. and  Nordal, S., Numerical Methods in Geotechnical Engineering: NUMGE 2010, 
CRC Press.  
4. Christian, J. T., Numerical Methods in Geotechnical Engineering, McGraw -Hill Publishers.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L044  Name: Soil Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite:  None  
Shear strength of cohesionless and cohesive soils, physico -chemical aspects, experimental 
determination of shear strength, failure theories, Yield criteria, influence on failure conditions 
of inter -mediate principal stress, history, drainage, rate of  stress applications etc.; Plastic 
equilibrium in soils, Mohr diagram, active and passive states, theories of earth pressure on 
retaining walls, effect of wall friction on the shape of sliding surface, theories of arching, 
bearing capacity, concepts of gen eral and local shear failure, critical height of vertical banks, 
various methods of computation of slope stability, earth pressure on timbering of cuts and on 
free and anchored bulkheads.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Lambe, T. W. and Whitman, R. V., Soil Mechanics in SI Version, Wiley, New Delhi.  
2. Scott, R. F., Principles of Soil Mechanics, Addison Wesley, World Student Edition.  
3. Leonards, G. A., Foundation Engineering, McGraw -Hill.  
4. Bowles, J. E., Foundations Analysis and Design, McGraw -Hill.  
5. Peck, R. B.,  Hanson, W. E., and Thornburn, T. H., Foundation Engineering, John Wiley and 
Sons.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L045  Name: Earth Retaining Structures  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Earth Pressure: Fundamental relationships between the lateral pressures and the strain with a 
back fill. Rankine’s and Coulomb’s theories, Active, passive and earth pressure at -rest; Backfill 
with broken surface, wall with broken back, concentrated surchar ge above the back fill, earth 
pressure due to uniform surcharge, earth pressure of stratified backfills, saturated and 
partially saturated backfill. Passive earth pressure in engineering practice. Assumption and 
conditions, point of application of passive earth pressures; Bulkheads: Definition and 
assumptions, conditions of end supports and distribution of active earth pressure and 
bulkheads, bulkheads with free and fixed earth supports, equivalent beam method, 
Improvements suggested by Rowe, Tschebotarioff ’s method, Anchorage of bulkheads and 
resistance of anchor walls, spacing between bulkheads and anchor walls, resistance of anchor 
plates, Consideration of effects of ground water, seepage, surcharge loading together with 
possibility of shallow and deep sl iding failures on retaining structure; Sheet Pile wall: Free 
earth system, fixed earth system, Dead man; Tunnel and Conduit: Stress distribution around 
tunnels, Types of conduits, Load on projecting conduits; Arching and Open Cuts: Arching in 
soils, Braced  excavations, Earth pressure against bracings in cuts, Heave of the bottom of cut 
in soft clays; Reinforced earth retaining structures -Design of earth embankments and slopes; 
Recent advances in Earth retaining structures.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Das, B. M.,  Principles of Foundation Engineering, Thomson, Indian Edition.  
2. Clayton, C. R. I., Milititsky, J. and Woods, R. I., Earth Pressure and Earth -retaining 
Structures, Chapman and Hall Publishers.  
3. Bowel, J., Foundation Engineering, Analysis and Design, McGraw H ill. Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
34 
 4. Raj, P., Geotechnical Engineering, Tata McGraw Hill.  
5. Craig, R. F., Soil Mechanics, Chapman and Hall (ELBS).  
 
Elective V  
Subject Code: 
CE4L051  Name: Remote Sensing and GIS  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Physics of remote sensing: Electromagnetic spectrum, atmospheric effects, energy interaction 
with earth surface features. Platforms and remote sensing sensors: Photographic camera, 
scanners, earth resources satellites, active and passive microwave sensors. Digital image 
processing: Image rectification, image enhancement, image classification and accuracy. Image 
interpretation. Geographical Information System (GIS): Map data representation, geographic 
database concepts and analysis. Application of remote sensing and GIS in land and wa ter 
resources system and evaluation.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Bhatta, B., Remote Sensing and GIS, Oxford University Press.  
2. Mesev, V., Integration of GIS and Remote Sensing, John Wiley & Sons Ltd.  
3. Nayak, S., and Zlatanova, S., Remote Sensing and GIS Technologies for Monitoring and 
Prediction of Disasters, Springer.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L052  Name: River Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
River basins; erosion from river catchments and its transportation by rivers; classification of 
streams, delta, alluvial fans, point bars, etc.; hydraulic geometry and plan form of alluvial 
rivers; features of gravel bed rivers; bed level changes in streams sedimentation on the 
upstream and degradat ion on the downstream of dams and barrages; morphology of some 
Indian rivers; river flow measurement techniques; stream gauging and analysis of rating 
curves (hydrometry); dynamics of tidal rivers and estuarine flows; mathematical models for 
sediment trans port and pollutant transport in rivers; introduction to software packages for 
river flow, sediment and pollutant transport; riverbank erosion mechanisms; direct bank 
erosion protection methods (use of fascine mattresses; geosynthetics; other [hard] options ); 
indirect bank erosion protection methods (flow deflection using spurs, groynes, etc. and their 
possible ill effects); foundations for bridges across rivers; river training works (guide bunds) 
for bridges and barrages.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Julien, P. Y. , River Mechanics, Cambridge University Press.  
2. Garg, S. K., Irrigation Engineering and Hydraulic Structures, Khanna Publishers.  
3. U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, River Hydraulics.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L053  Name: Open Channel Hydraulics  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Basic concepts; Energy and Momentum equations and their applications; Critical flow, channel 
control ad transitions; Uniform flow and flow resistance; Sheet flow; Concepts of boundary 
layer and surface roughness; Theoretical uniform flow  equations; Instability of uniform flow; 
Gradually varied flow , flow profile classification and computation methods; Flow profiles in 
natural channels; Spatially varied flow; Hydraulic jump; Unsteady flow, continuity equation, 
dynamic equation, wave propag ation; Method of characteristics; Rapidly varied unsteady flow, 
surges; Dam break problems.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Subramanya, K., Flow in Open Channels, Tata McGraw -Hill.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
35 
 2. Chanson, H., Hydraulics of Open Channel Flow, Elsevier.  
3. Chow, V. T., Open Channel Hy draulics, McGraw Hill.  
4. French, R., Open Channel Hydraulics, McGraw -Hill. 
5. Sturm, T.W., Open Channel Hydraulics, Tata McGraw -Hill. 
Subject Code: 
CE4L054  Name: Water Resources Systems  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction to systems concept  in water resources engineering: its role in planning and 
management; data acquisition and processing; descriptive and prescriptive models; economics 
of water resources systems; social, economical, technical and environmental issues; decision 
making under uncertainty and/or risk; evaluation of project alternatives; application to surface 
and subsurface water resources systems planning and management.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Vedula, S. and Mujumdar, P. P., Water Resources Systems, McGraw -Hill.  
2. Jain, S. K., an d Singh, V. P., Water Resources Systems Planning and Management, 
Elsevier.  
3. Purcell, P., Design of Water Resources Systems, Thomas Telford Publishing.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE4L055  Name: Design of Hydraulic Structures  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Concrete dams, force and stress analysis for components like piers, bridges and trash rack and 
their reinforcement detailing; stress analysis around galleries, adits and shafts and 
reinforcement provisions; integrated stability analysis of concrete dams co nsidering foundation 
rock; construction methods for concrete dams. Embankment dams, seepage analysis (finding 
the phreatic line) for different types of embankment dams; seepage control measures for 
embankment dams; construction methods for embankment dams.  Spillways and energy 
dissipators design of ogee spillways; calculations for chute spillway profiles; flow 
characteristics of shaft and syphon spillways; types of energy dissipators, their selection and 
dimensioning; flow characteristics of radial gates; i ntroduction to relevant BIS codes and 
guidelines. Barrages - design of barrage structure and canal head regulator; construction 
methods for barrages. Irrigation structures, Canals, cross drainage works, falls and energy 
dissipators.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Garg, S. K., Irrigation Engineering and Hydraulic Structures, Khanna Publishers.  
2. Ghosh, K., Analysis and Design Practice of Hydraulic Concrete Structures, PHI Learning 
Private Limited.  
3. Novak, P., Moffat, A. I. B., Nalluri, C., and Narayanan, R. Hydraulic S tructures, Taylor & 
Fransis.  
 
 
Elective VI  
Subject Code: 
CE4L061  Name: Transportation Planning  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Transportation planning Process, Demand -supply interaction of a transportation system, four -
step-travel demand modeling - such as trip generation, trip distribution, modal split and traffic 
assignment, discussion of case study on travel demand model, land -use transport model, 
household travel survey, public transportation, traffic forecasting techniques on highway, 
Demand analysis for air transportation  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
36 
 Book:  
1. Kadiyali, L. R., Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning, Khanna Publishers.  
2. Ortuzar, J. D. and Williumsen, L. G., Modeling Transport, John Wiley & Sons Ltd.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE4L062  Name: Pavement Design  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Types of Pavement, Pavement Composition, Philosophy of design of flexible and rigid 
pavements, analysis of pavements using different analytical methods, selection of pavement 
design input parameters, traffic loading and volume, material characterization, drainage, 
failure criteria, reliability, design of flexible and rigid pavements using different methods, 
pavement evaluation and overlay design.  
Text/Reference Books :  
1. Huang, Y. H., Pavement Analysis and Desig n, Pearson Education.  
2. Yoder, E. J. and Witczak, M. W., Principles of Pavement Design, John Wiley & Sons Ltd.  
3. Mallick, R. B. and El -Korchi, T., Pavement Engineering: Principles and Practice, CRC Press.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L063  Name: Traffic Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Driver behaviour, visual angle modelling, traffic information and control systems, traffic 
studies - volume, speed and delay studies, elements of traffic flow theory, Greenshields’ model 
and Greenberg’s model,  PCU  concept, characteristics of uninterrupted traffic, gap acceptance -
Raff’s method, queuing theory, shock wave, capacity and LOS of Uninterrupted facilities, 
characteristics of interrupted traffic, IRC method of roundabout design,  traffic characteristics 
at unsignalised intersections, queue discharge characteristics at signalised intersections, Trial 
Cycle method and Webster’s method of signal design, dilemma zone, actuated signal control, 
signal coordination.  
Text/Reference Books :  
1. Mannering, F. L., Kilares ki, W. P. and Washburn, S. S., Principles of Highway Engineering 
and Traffic Analysis, Wiley India Edition.  
2. Drew, D. R., Traffic Flow Theory and Control, MaGraw -Hill. 
3. May, A. D.  Traffic Flow Fundamentals, Prentice Hall.  
4. Slinn, M., Guest, P. and Mathews, P., Traffic Engineering Design, Elsevier.  
5. Roess, R. P., Prassas, E. S., McShane, W. R. Traffic Engineering , Pearson.  
6. Kadiyali, L. R., Traffic Engineering  and Transport Planning, Khanna Publishers.  
7. Pignatro, L. J., Traffic Engineering -Theory and Practice, Prentice -Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 
New Jersey.  
8. Khanna, S. K. and Justo, C. E. G., Highway Engineering, Nem Chand & Bros, Roorkee.  
9. Khisty, C. J. and Lal, B. K., Transportation Engineering, Prentice Hall India.  
10. Papacostas, C. S. and Prevedouros, P. D., Transportation Engineering & Planning, Prentice -
Hall. 
  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
37 
  
Dual Degree (B.Tech. Civil Engineering and M.Tech. Environmental 
Engineering)  
Curriculum (7th Semester – 10th Semester)  
SEMESTER - VII 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Breadth - 4  3-0/1-0 3/4 3/4  
Water Treatment and Supply  CE6L101  3-1-0 4 4 39 
Wastewater Treatment  CE6L102  3-1-0 4 4 39 
Elective - 1  3-0-0 3 3  
CAD Laboratory  CE4P001  0-0-3 2 3 40 
Industrial Training Defence  CE4T001  0-0-0 2 0  
Project – Part 1 (CE)  CE4D001  0-0-0 4 0  
Environmental Monitoring Laboratory  CE6P101  0-0-3 2 3 40 
  Total  24/25  17/18   
SEMESTER - VIII   
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Air Pollution Control  CE6L103  3-1-0 4 4 40 
Environmental Impact Assessment  CE6L104  3-1-0 4 4 40 
Elective - 2  3-0/1-0 4 3/4  
Elective – 3  3-1-0 4 3  
Advanced Environmental Engineering 
Laboratory  CE6P102  0-0-3 2 3 41 
Project – Part 2 (CE)  CE4D002  0-0-0 6 0  
  Total  23/24  18  
SEMESTER - IX  
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Elective - 4  3-0/1-0 3/4 3/4  
Thesis : Part -I (CE)  CE6D001  0-0-0 12  0  
  Total  15/16  4  
SEMESTER - X  
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Seminar  CE6S001  0-0-0 2 0  
Environmental Design Sessional  CE6P103  0-0-3 2 2 41 
Thesis : Part -II (CE)  CE6D003  0-0-0 12  0  
  Total  16 2  
 Grand Total  Total  220/225    
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
38 
 Elective -1 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Computational Hydraulics  CE4L032  3-0-0 3 3 42 
Water Resources Management  CE4L033  3-0-0 3 3 42 
Hydraulic and Hydrologic Analysis and Design  CE4L034  3-0-0 3 3 42 
Hydropower Engineering  CE4L035  3-0-0 3 3 43 
Sustainable Water and Sanitation System  CE4L042  3-0-0 3 3 43 
Environmental System Management  CE4L043  3-0-0 3 3 44 
River Engineering  CE4L051  3-0-0 3 3 44 
Open Channel Hydraulics  CE4L052  3-0-0 3 3 44 
Design of Hydraulic Structures  CE4L054  3-0-0 3 3 45 
Construction Management  CE4L027  3-0-0 3 3 45 
Advanced Transportation Engineering  CE4L029  3-0-0 3 3 45 
Soil Dynamics  CE4L045  3-0-0 3 3 46 
Advanced Foundation Engineering  CE4L046  3-0-0 3 3 46 
Transportation Planning  CE4L055  3-0-0 3 3 46 
Pavement Design  CE4L056  3-0-0 3 3 47 
Traffic Engineering  CE4L057  3-0-0 3 3 47 
NB: Any other subjects of same or higher level floated by any other specialisations of School of Infrastructure 
and/or any other Schools can also be taken as an elective, as suggested by faculty advisor/PG Coordinators  
 
Elective - 1 to 4  
Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Advanced Water and Wastewater Treatment  CE6L105  3-1-0 4  47 
Environmental Economics  CE6L106  3-0-0 3  48 
Environmental Hydraulics  CE6L107  3-1-0 4  49 
Solid Waste Management  CE6L108  3-1-0 4  49 
Industrial  Pollution Prevention  CE6L109  3-0-0 3  50 
Environmental Chemistry and Microbiology  CE6L110  3-1-0 4  51 
Highway Environment and Noise Pollution 
Control  CE6L111  3-0-0 3  51 
Environmental Nanotechnology and 
Applications  CE6L112  3-1-0 4  52 
Water Quality Modeling and Management  CE6L113  3-0-0 3  52 
Water Resources Planning and Management  CE6L513  3-1-0 4  53 
Design of Pipe Networks  CE6L514  3-1-0 4  53 
GIS & Remote Sensing Applications in Civil 
Engineering  CE6L515  3-0-0 3  54 
Non-Point Source Pollution of  Water 
Resources  CE6L516  3-0-0 3  54 
Integrated Watershed Management  CE6L518  3-0-0 3  55 
Geotechnics of Polluted Sites  CE6L216  3-0-0 3  55 
Geotechnics of Waste and Waste Containment  CE6L217  3-0-0 3  56 
Groundwater Modeling & Simulation   ES6L104  3-0-0 3  57 
Mathematical Methods  MA6L001  3-1-0 4  57 
Advanced Techniques in Operation Research  MA6L002  3-1-0 4  57 
NB: Any other subjects of same or higher level floated by any other specialisations of SIF or any other Schools can 
also be taken as an elective,  as suggested by faculty advisor/PG Coordinators  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
39 
 Syllabus  
Subject Code: 
CE6L101  Name: Water Treatment and Supply  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
 
Prerequisite: None  
Water requirements, Types of water demands, Water demand forecasting, Surface water 
and ground water sources, Water quality and drinking water standards, Water treatment 
systems, Physico -chemical processes, Sedimentation, Coagulation, Flocculation, Granular 
media filtration, Disinfection, Water softening, Adsorption and ion exchange 
processes,Desalination, Membrane filtration, Treatment of specific contaminants: Fluoride, 
Nitra and Arsenic, Water supply schemes, Determination of reservoir capacity, 
Gravitational, pumping and combined water supply schemes, Water -lifting arrang ements, 
Distribution reservoirs and service storage, Pumping and design considerations for pumps, 
Design and hydraulic analysis of water distribution system, Distribution system 
components, Aqueducts, Hydraulics of conduits, Appurtenances and valves, water  pipes, 
Storage tanks, Optimization of pipe network systems, Planning of urban and metropolitan 
water supply project and its implementation  
Text/Reference Books:  
 Peavy H. S., Rowe D. R. and Tchobanoglous G., Environmental Engineering, McGraw -Hill 
Internati onal Ed.  
 Bhave P. R. and Gupta R., Analysis of Water Distribution Networks, Narosa publishing 
house, New Delhi.  
 Qasim S. R., Motley E. M. and Zhu G., Water Works Engineering - Planning, Design and 
Operation, Prentice Hall.  
 Central Public Health and Environm ental Engineering Organization, Manual on Water 
Supply and Treatment, 2nd Ed, Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi 
December.1999 (Check)  
 Hammer M. J., Water  and Waste  water  Technology, PHI Learning.  
 McGhee T. J., Water Supply and Sewerage, McGraw Hill International.  
 Relevant BIS Codes  
Subject Code: 
CE6L102  Name: Wastewater Treatment  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
 
Prerequisite : None  
Wastewater - Sources, nature and characteristics, Population equivalent, Municipal 
wastewater collection, Systems of sanitation and water carriage, Estimation of wastewater 
flows and variation in wastewater flow, Estimation of storm water runoff, Process Flow 
sheets, Reactor Analysis, Unit operations and processes, Theory and Design of biological 
treatment processes, Aerobic treatm ent such as activated sludge process, Extended 
Aeration, oxidation ditches, Biofilm Processes: trickling filters, biotowers, MBBR  and 
Natural Processes: waste stabilization ponds, aerated lagoon, Anaerobic treatment: upflow 
anaerobic sludge blanket reacto r, Anaerobic Filters, sludge treatment and disposal, Design 
of a wastewater treatment plant,  
On Site collection and Disposal, pit latrines, Compositing privy, Septic Tanks and Aqua 
privy.  
Text/ Reference  Books:  
1. Metcalf & Eddy., Wastewater Engineering - Treatment and Reuse (Revised by G. 
Tchobanoglous, F. L. Burton and H. D. Stensel), Tata McGraw Hill.  
2. Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organization, Manual on Water 
Supply and Treatment, 2nd Ed, Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi December.  
3. Hammer M. J., Water  and Waste  water  Technology, PHI Learning.  
4. McGhee T. J., Water Supply and Sewerage, McGraw Hill International.  
5. Peavy H. S., Rowe D. R. and Tchobanoglous G., Environmental Engineering, McGraw -Hill Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
40 
 International Ed.  
6. Quasim S. R.,  Motley E. M. and Zhu G., Water Works Engineering - Planning, Design and 
Operation, Prentice Hall.  
7. Eckenfelder, W. W., Jr. (2000) Industrial Water Pollution Control, 3d ed., McGraw -Hill 
Subject Code: 
CE4P001  Name: CAD Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit:  2  
Prerequisite : None  
Exposure to commercial software tools for analysis, design and research in civil 
engineering.  
Subject Code: 
CE6P101  Name: Environmental Monitoring 
laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit: 2  
Prerequisite : None  
Physical and chemical characteristics of water and wastewater, Optimum coagulant dose, 
Break point Chlorination, DO, BOD and COD, Microbial characteristics of water – total and 
fecal coliforms, Settling Column Analysis, Ambient air quality Analysis - Determination of 
SPM, PM 10, PM2.5, CO, NOx and SOx, detection of environmental noise.   
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater, APHA, 20thEdition, 
Washington, 1998  
2. Sawyer, C.N. and McCarty, P.L., and Parkin, G.F. Chemistry for Environmental 
Engineers, 4thEdn. McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1994.  
3. Garg, S.K., “Environmental Engineering Vol. I & II”, Khanna Publishers, New Delhi  
4. Modi, P.N., “Environmental Engineering Vol. I & II”, Standard Book House, Delhi -6 
Subject Code: 
CE6L103  Name: Air Pollution Control  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
 
Prerequisite: None  
Air pollution, Sources of air pollution, Types of pollutant, Gases and particulate; 
Atmospheric sources, sinks, transport; Effects on health and environment; Criteria 
pollutants, ambient and  source standards. Characterization of aerosols, size distributions, 
Gaseous Pollutants, Control systems, Air quality management, dispersion modeling. 
Industrial and Vehicular sources of air pollution, Behaviour of pollutants in atmosphere, 
Emission factor s, regulations, control strategies and policies; Monitoring of air pollutants, 
Particulate and Gaseous Pollutant Control, Control technologies for removal of SO 2, NOx, 
VOC, Control technologies for motor vehicles.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Peavy H. S., Rowe D.  R. and Tchobanoglous G., Environmental Engineering, McGraw -Hill 
International Edition.  
2. Nevers N. D., Air Pollution Control Engineering, Mc. Graw Hill International Edition.  
3. Buonicore A.J., and Davis W.T., Air Pollution Engineering Manual, van Nostrand -
Reinhold, New York.  
4. Flagan R.C., and Seinfeld J.H., Fundamentals of Air Pollution Engineering, Prentice Hall, 
New Jersey.  
5. Wark K., Warner C. F. and Davis W., Air Pollution Its Origin and Control, 3rd edition, 
Harper and Row, New York.  
6. Rao M. N., Air Pollutio n, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi.  
7. Griffin R. D., Principles of Air Quality Management, CRC Press, Boca Raton, USA.  
Subject Code: 
CE6L104  Name: Environmental Impact Assessment  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
 
Prerequisite: None  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
41 
 Concept  of  environmental  impact,  Introduction to Environmental  impact  assessment  
(EIA) – definitions, terminology and concepts, Evolution of EIA in the USA, Key features of 
the National Environmental Policy Act and its  implementation  and  the  Cou ncil  on  
Environmental  Quality  (CEQ)  guidelines,  Role  of  the  USEPA,  Evolution  of  
EIA  in  India,  Sustainable  development,  Generalised  EIA  process  flow  chart,  
Screening,  Initial  environmental examination (IEE), Scoping, Public participa tion. 
Environment Risk assessment, Pollution prevention and Waste minimization, sustainable 
development (SD), Life cycle assessment. Global Environmental Issues.  
EIA - Screening and scoping criteria, Rapid and comprehensive EIA, Impact assessment 
methods, checklists, matrices, quantitative methods, networks, overlay mapping, Impact 
prediction and evaluation, Legislative and environmental clearance procedures in India and 
other countries, Siting criteria, CRZ, Public participation, Resettlement and rehabilit ation.  
Practical applications of EIA, EIA methodologies, Baseline data collection, Prediction and 
assessment of impacts on physical, biological and socio -economic environment, 
Environmental management plan, Post project monitoring, initial environmental 
examination (IEE), environmental impact statement (EIS), environmental appraisal, 
environmental audit (EA), Environmental impact factors and areas of consideration, 
measurement of environmental impact, organisation, scope and methodologies of EIA, 
case studi es stressing physical aspects of environment, Evolution of EIA, EIA at project, 
Regional and policy levels, Strategic EIA, EIA process.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Canter L., Environmental Impact Assessment, McGraw Hill.  
2. Asolekar S. R. and Gopichandran R. Preve ntive Environmental Management - An Indian 
Perspective Foundation Books Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi (the Indian association of Cambridge 
University Press, UK).  
3. Rau G.J. and Wooten, C.D., Environmental Impact Analysis Handbook, McGraw Hill.  
4. Dhameja S. K., Environm ental Engineering and Management, S. K. Kataria& Sons  
5. Anjaneyulu Y. , Environmental impact assessment methodologies, B.S. Publications  
6. World Bank ‘Environmental Assessment Source Book’, Environment Dept., Washington 
D.C. 
7. Welford R., Corporate Environmental  Management, Earthscan Publications Limited, 
London.  
8. Sayre D., Inside ISO 14000: Competitive Advantage of Environmental Management, St. 
Louis Press, Florida.  
Subject Code: 
CE6P102  Name: Advanced Environmental 
Engineering laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit: 2  
Prerequisite: None  
Use of analytical instruments such as AAS, GC, LC for gas and micropollutant analysis, 
heavy metal detection, use of microscope, isolation and analysis of microbes, Tracer 
Studies for Reactors, Adsorption Kinetics  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater, APHA, 20thEdition, 
Washington, 1998  
2. Sawyer, C.N. and McCarty, P.L., and Parkin, G.F. Chemistry for Environmental 
Engineers, 4th Edn. McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1994.  
Subject Code: 
CE6P103  Name: Environmental Design Sessional  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit: 2  
Prerequisite: None  
Environmental engineering hydraulic design: design of distribution systems, design of 
urban sanitary and storm water sewers, design of water and wastewater pumping systems. 
Design of  intake structure, detailed design of water treatment plant, Design of wastewater 
treatment and disposal systems, use of ANOVA, statistical analysis of case studies, use of Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
42 
 software in environmental design.  
 
Text/Reference Books:   
1. Bhave P R , Optimal Design Of Water Distribution Networks, Narosa publishing house, 
New Delhi., 2003  
2. Bhave P R and Gupta R., Analysis of Water Distribution Networks, Narosa publishing 
house, New Delhi, 2006.  
3. Montgomery, J.M., Water Treatment Principles and Design, John Wiley and Sons.  
4. Check for R. Qasim Books for Design of Water Treatment Plant and Wastewater 
treatment Plant  
5. Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organization, Manual on Water 
Supply and Treatment, 2nd Ed, Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi D ecember 
1999. - Check its date  
6. Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organization, Manual on Sewerage 
and Sewage Treatment, 2nd Ed, Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi, December 
2014- Check 2014  
7. Quasim, S. R., Motley E. M. and Zhu, G., Wa ter Works Engineering - Planning, Design 
and Operation, Prentice Hall, 2000.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE4L032  Name: Computational Hydraulics  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
General numerical methods; Introduction to FEM, FDM and BEM; Perturbation method; 
Methods of characteristics; Hydroinformatics; Applications to water resources engineering  
Books:  
1. Michael B. Abbott, Anthony W. Minns, Computational Hydraulics.  
2. Cornelis B. Vreugdenhil, Computational Hydraulics.  
3. Ioana Popescu, Computational Hydraulics.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L033  Name: Water Resources Management  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Water resources economics; Water resources conservation techniques; Optimization in 
water resources engineering; Irrigation management; Reservoir management; Sustainable 
water resources development; Environmental impact assessment of water resources 
projects.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Feldman, Dave Water Resources Management.  
2. Nageswara Rao, K., Water Resources Management.  
3. Lenton, Roberto L., Muller, Mike, Integrated Water Resources Management in Practice.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L034  Name: Hydraulic and Hydrologic Analysis 
and Design  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Synthetic design storms & Estimation of peak discharge, Urban storm drainage design, 
Culvert design, Detention storage design, Flood frequency analysis; Design of water 
distribution network, Analysis and design of mobile and rigid boundary channels, Tractive 
force concepts in channel design, Design of canal headworks, distribution works, a nd 
cross-drainage works, Design of gravity dams, spillways, and energy dissipators.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
43 
 Text/Reference Books:  
1. Ben C. Yen, Yeou -Koung Tung, Reliability and Uncertainty Analyses in Hydraulic Design: 
A Report, American Society of Civil Engineers  
2. Bruce E. Larock, Roland W. Jeppson, Gary Z. Watters, Hydraulics of Pipeline Systems, 
CRC Press  
3. Ghosh, Karunamoy, Analysis and Design Practice of Hydraulic Concrete Structures, PHI 
Learning Pvt. Ltd  
4. Chow, Ven Te, Maidment, David R. and Mays, Larry W., Applied Hydrology, Tat a 
McGraw -Hill Education  
Subject Code: 
CE4L035  Name: Hydropower Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Power generation through storage (dams) and diversion (barrages); run -of the river 
schemes with and without pondage; integrated powerhouse with barrage / on diversion 
channel; pumped storage schemes; tidal power plants; hydroelectric plant layouts for open 
flow diversion schemes and pressure diversion system or their combinations; underground 
projects with pressure diversion system s; position of power house (surface, underground 
or semi - underground); hydropower conveyance structures intakes, conveyance structures 
and outflow structures; intakes to canals and tunnels (with corresponding de -silting 
arrangements); intakes for in -stream powerhouses; reservoir type intakes, trash rack and 
its design; intakes for embankment dams; water conducting systems open channels, fore -
bays, tunnels, surge tanks, penstocks, valves and anchor blocks; layout and sections of 
tunnels; tunnel deign basics ; construction methods for tunnels; penstock components 
(bends, reducer, branches, manifolds); turbine foundations and overhead traveling crane 
frame; underground powerhouse cavern; types of turbines and their selection.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Subramanya, K., Flow in open channels, Tata McGraw -Hill Education  
2. Garg, S. K., Irrigation Engineering and Hydraulic Structures, Khanna Publishers  
3. Subramanya, K., Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulic Machines, Tata McGraw -Hill Education  
4. Daugherty, Robert Long, Hydraulic Turbi nes, McGraw -Hill 
Subject Code: 
CE4L042  Name: Sustainable Water and Sanitation 
Systems  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Concept of sustainability in water and waste management, Water Conservation, Rainwater 
Harvesting: Roof water harvesting, technology, quality, health issues, Groundwater 
recharge, techniques, case studies, Water tariff, sustainable water management. 
Decent ralised wastewater treatment systems, Reliability and cost effectiveness of 
wastewater systems, Tertiary treatment, process selection, granular - medium filtration, 
micro screening, removal of toxic compounds and refractory organics, removal of dissolved 
inorganic substances, Natural Wastewater Treatment Systems, Natural and constructed 
wetlands, different types, Mechanisms, performance, design, case studies. Land treatment 
systems. Wastewater reuse and reclamation. Rural water supply and sanitation, Low -cost 
sanitation, Dry sanitation methods, Pit latrines, VIP latrines, Aquaprivy, septic tank, 
Organic solid waste management techniques, Composting/vermicomposting, biogas 
technology, plasma technology,  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Ahluwalia, P. and Nema, A. K., Water and Wastewater Systems: Source, Treatment, 
Conveyance and Disposal, S. K. Kataria & Sons.  
2. Arceivala, S. J. and Asolekar, S. R., Wastewater Treatment for Pollution Control and 
Reuse, Tata McGraw Hill.  
3. Cites, R. W., Middlebrooks, E. J., and Reed, S. C., Natural Wastewater Treatment Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
44 
 Systems, CRC Taylor and Francis.  
4. Cairncross, S. and Feachem, R., Environmental Health Engineering in the Tropics, John 
Wiley & Sons.  
5. Metcalf & Eddy, Wastewater Engineering - Treatment and Reuse (Revised by 
Tchobanoglous, G., Burton, F. L. and Stensel, H. D.), Tata McGraw Hill.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L043  Name: Environmental System 
Management  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Human - environment relationship, normative criteria, descriptive and prescriptive models, 
limits of growth; Environmental and natural resources economics, pollution control policy, 
growth in a finite environment; Environmental protection laws; Numerical/mathematical 
modelling of environmental syste ms, subsystems, and pollutant transport processes; 
Planning and management of environmental systems: optimization techniques, stochastic 
modelling, statistical inferences; Large scale systems; Optimal monitoring network design, 
identification of sources; R isk reliability and uncertainty in environmental systems; Topics 
in groundwater and surface water quality management.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Schnoor, J. L., Environmental Modelling, Wiley -interscience.  
2. Boubel, R. W., Fox, D. L., Turner, D. B. and. Stern, A.  C., Fundamentals of Air Pollution, 
Academic Press, New York.  
3. Thomann, R. V., and Muller, J. A., Principles of Surface Water Quality Modelling and 
Control, Harper International Edition.  
4. Tchobanoglous, G., Schroeder, E. D., Water Quality, Addison – Wesley P ublishing 
Company, Reading, Massachusetts.  
5. Welford, R., Corporate Environmental Management, Earthscan Publications Limited, 
London.  
6. Rosencranz, A., Divan, S. and Noble, M. L., Environmental Law and Policy in India : 
Cases, Materials and Statutes, Tripathi  Pvt. Ltd, Bombay.  
7. Asolekar, S. R. and Gopichandran, R., Preventive Environmental Management - An 
Indian Perspective Foundation Books Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi (The Indian Association of 
Cambridge University Press, UK).  
Subject Code: 
CE4L051  Name: River Engi neering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
River basins; erosion from river catchments and its transportation by rivers; classification 
of streams, delta, alluvial fans, point bars, etc.; hydraulic geometry and plan form of 
alluvial rivers; features of gravel bed rivers; bed level changes in streams sedimentation 
on the upstream and degradation on the downstream of dams and barrages; morphology 
of some Indian rivers; river flow measurement techniques; stream gauging and analysis of 
rating cur ves (hydrometry); dynamics of tidal rivers and estuarine flows; mathematical 
models for sediment transport and pollutant transport in rivers; introduction to software 
packages for river flow, sediment and pollutant transport; riverbank erosion mechanisms; 
direct bank erosion protection methods (use of fascine mattresses; geosynthetics; other 
[hard] options); indirect bank erosion protection methods (flow deflection using spurs, 
groynes, etc. and their possible ill effects); foundations for bridges across ri vers; river 
training works (guide bunds) for bridges and barrages.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Julien, P. Y., River Mechanics, Cambridge University Press.  
2. Garg, S. K., Irrigation Engineering and Hydraulic Structures, Khanna Publishers.  
3. U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, River Hydraulics.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L052  Name: Open Channel Hydraulics  L-T-P: 3-0-
0 Credit: 3  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
45 
 Prerequisite: None  
Basic concepts; Energy and Momentum equations and their applications; Critical flow, 
channel control ad transitions; Uniform flow and flow resistance; Sheet flow; Concepts of 
boundary layer and surface roughness; Theoretical uniform flow equations; Instability of 
uniform flow; Gradually varied flow , flow profile classification and computation methods; 
Flow p rofiles in natural channels; Spatially varied flow; Hydraulic jump; Unsteady flow, 
continuity equation, dynamic equation, wave propagation; Method of characteristics; 
Rapidly varied unsteady flow, surges; Dam break problems.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Subramanya, K., Flow in Open Channels, Tata McGraw -Hill.  
2. Chanson, H., Hydraulics of Open Channel Flow, Elsevier.  
3. Chow, V. T., Open Channel Hydraulics, McGraw Hill.  
4. French, R., Open Channel Hydraulics, McGraw -Hill. 
5. Sturm, T.W., Open Channel Hydraulics, Tata McGraw -Hill. 
Subject Code: 
CE4L054  Name: Design of Hydraulic Structures  L-T-P: 3-0-
0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Concrete dams, force and stress analysis for components like piers, bridges and trash rack 
and their reinforcement detailing; stress analysis around galleries, adits and shafts and 
reinforcement provisions; integrated stability analysis of concrete dams considering 
foundation rock; construction methods for concrete dams. Embankment dams, seepage 
analysis (finding the phreatic line) for different types of embankment dams; seepage 
control measures for embankment dams; construction methods for embankment dams. 
Spillways and energy dissipators design of ogee spillways; calculations for chute spillway 
profiles; flow characteristics of shaft a nd syphon spillways; types of energy dissipators, 
their selection and dimensioning; flow characteristics of radial gates; introduction to 
relevant BIS codes and guidelines. Barrages - design of barrage structure and canal head 
regulator; construction metho ds for barrages. Irrigation structures, Canals, cross drainage 
works, falls and energy dissipators.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Garg, S. K., Irrigation Engineering and Hydraulic Structures, Khanna Publishers.  
2. Ghosh, K., Analysis and Design Practice of Hydraulic  Concrete Structures, PHI Learning 
Private Limited.  
3. Novak, P., Moffat, A. I. B., Nalluri, C., and Narayanan, R. Hydraulic Structures, Taylor & 
Fransis.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L027  Name: Construction Management  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Construction Management Overview; Construction Industry; Construction Projects 
Management; Scheduling Techniques for Construction Projects; Construction Estimating; 
Construction Cost Control; Construction Contracts Administration; Construction Practice  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Jha, Neeraj Kumar, Construction Project Management, Pearson Education India  
2. Williams, Trefor, Construction Management, Pearson Education India  
3. Chitkara, Krishnan, Construction Project Management Techniques And Practice, Tata 
McGraw Hill  
4. Purifoy R.L., Construction Planning, equipments and Methods, Mc Graw Hill, Tokyo, 
Japan.   Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
46 
 Subject Code: 
CE4L029  Name: Advanced Transportation 
Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Airports: introduction; characteristics of aircrafts related to airport design; obstruction 
clearance criteria; design of airside facilities: runway orientation, length, capacity, 
configuration and number, taxiway  layout, design of fillets, high -speed exit taxiway, apron 
gate and circulation areas, hanger; design of landside facilities: terminal building  functional 
areas and facilities, centralized and de -centralized concepts, vertical distribution; airport 
planning and site selection; pavement design; visual aids; demand estimation of air travel, 
drainage. Railways: - Introduction, classification of routes; railway gauge, coning of wheels 
and canting of rails, train resistance and hauling power; track components: rails, sleepers, 
fastenings, ballast and formation; track stresses; turnouts and crossings, signa ls and 
control systems, welded rails. Elements of water and pipeline transportation. Economic 
Analysis of Transportation Projects  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Horonjeff, Robert, Planning and Design of Airports, McGraw Hill  
2. Chandra, Satish and Agarwal, M.M., Railway Engineering, Oxford University Press India  
3. Garber, NJ and Hoel, LA, Principles of Traffic and Highway Engineering, Cengage 
Learning  
Subject Code: 
CE4L045  Name: Soil Dynamics  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction, Fundamental of vibrations, dynamic properties of geomaterials, transient 
vibrations, analysis of free and forced   vibrations using spring dashpot model, single 
degree of freedom system, multidegrees of freedom system,  application of single a nd 
multidegree of freedom systems, wave propagation in elastic media, laboratory and field 
evaluation of soil properties, analysis of earthquake loadings, liquefaction analysis.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Saran, S., Soil Dynamics and Machine Foundations, Galgotia Publications.  
2. Das, B. M. and Ramana, G. V., Principles of Soil Dynamics, CL -Engineering.  
3. Richart, F. E., Woods, R. D., and Hall, J. R., Vibrations of Soils and Foundations, 
Prentice Hall.  
4. Kramer, S. L., Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering, Prentic e Hall.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L046  Name: Advanced Foundation Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Bearing capacity of shallow foundations: Prandtl, Terzaghi and Meyerhof s method of 
analysis, safe and allowable bearing pressures, selection of  type and depth of foundations, 
combined footings, mat foundations including floating raft, settlement calculations, 
Skempton - Bjerrum modification, and Martin s method, bearing capacity of layered soils, 
bearing capacity of footings on slopes, Deep found ations: mechanics of load transfer in 
piles, load carrying capacity, pile load test, lateral loaded piles, design of pile groups 
including settlement calculations, design of block foundation, well foundations, coffer 
dams, pier foundations, earth pressure computations on retaining walls and their design, 
earthquake response of foundations.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Das, B. M., Principles of Foundation Engineering, Cengage Learning.  
2. Budhu, M., Soil Mechanics and Foundations, Wiley Publishers, New Delhi.  
3. Coduto, D. P., Foundation Design: Principles and Practices, Prentice Hill Publishers.  
4. Holts, R. D. and Kovacs, W. D., An Introduction to Geotechnical Engineering, Prentice Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
47 
 Hall. 
5. Das, B. M., Shallow Foundations: Bearing Capacity and Settlement, CRC Press.  
6. Tomilson,  M. J., Foundation Design and Construction, Pearson Publishers.   
Subject Code: 
CE4L055  Name: Transportation Planning  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Transportation planning Process, Demand -supply interaction of a transportation system, 
four-step-travel demand modeling - such as trip generation, trip distribution, modal split 
and traffic assignment, discussion of case study on travel demand model, land -use 
transport model, household travel survey, public transportation, traffic forecasting  
techniques on highway, Demand analysis for air transportation  
Text/Reference Books:   
1. Kadiyali, L. R., Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning, Khanna Publishers.  
2. Ortuzar, J. D. and Williumsen, L. G., Modeling Transport, John Wiley & Sons Ltd.  
Subject  Code: 
CE4L056  Name: Pavement Design  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Types of Pavement, Pavement Composition, Philosophy of design of flexible and rigid 
pavements, analysis of pavements using different analytical methods, selection of 
pavement design input parameters, traffic loading and volume, material characterization, 
drainage, failure criteria, reliability, design of flexible and rigid pavements using different 
methods, pavement evaluation and overlay design.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Huang, Y. H., Pavement Analysis and Design, Pearson Education.  
2. Yoder, E. J. and Witczak, M. W., Principles of Pavement Design, John Wiley & Sons Ltd.  
3. Mallick, R. B. and El -Korchi, T., Pavement Engineering: Principles and Practice, CRC 
Press.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L057  Name: Traffic Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Driver behaviour, visual angle modelling, traffic information and control systems, traffic 
studies - volume, speed and delay studies, elements of traffic flow theory, Greenshields’  
model and Greenberg’s model,  PCU concept, characteristics of uninterrupted traffic, gap 
acceptance -Raff’s method, queuing theory, shock wave, capacity and LOS of Uninterrupted 
facilities, characteristics of interrupted traffic, IRC method of roundabout d esign,  traffic 
characteristics at unsignalised intersections, queue discharge characteristics at signalised 
intersections, Trial Cycle method and Webster’s method of signal design, dilemma zone, 
actuated signal control, signal coordination.  
Text/Reference  Books:  
1. Mannering, F. L., Kilareski, W. P. and Washburn, S. S., Principles of Highway 
Engineering and Traffic Analysis, Wiley India Edition.  
2. Drew, D. R., Traffic Flow Theory and Control, MaGraw -Hill. 
3. May, A. D.  Traffic Flow Fundamentals, Prentice Hall.  
4. Slinn, M., Guest, P. and Mathews, P., Traffic Engineering Design, Elsevier.  
5. Roess, R. P., Prassas, E. S., McShane, W. R. Traffic Engineering, Pearson.  
6. Kadiyali, L. R., Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning, Khanna Publishers.  
7. Pignatro, L. J., Traffic Engineering -Theory and Practice, Prentice -Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 
New Jersey.  
8. Khanna, S. K. and Justo, C. E. G., Highway Engineering, Nem Chand & Bros, Roorkee.  
9. Khisty, C. J. and Lal, B. K., Transportation Engineering, Prentice Hall India.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
48 
 10. Papacostas, C. S. and Prevedouros, P. D., Transportation Engineering & Planning, 
Prentice -Hall. 
Subject Code: 
CE6L105  Name: Advanced Water and  
Wastewater Treatment  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
 
Prerequisite: None  
Capabilities and limitations of conventional water and waste water treatment methods, 
Need for advanced treatment of water and waste water, Advanced water treatment - Iron 
and manganese removal, colour and odour removal, activated carbon treatment, carbonate 
balance for corrosion control, ion exchange, electro -dialys is, reverse osmosis and modern 
methods and flouride management.  
 
Nitrogen and phosphorus removal methods including biological methods, Methods for the 
removal of heavy metals, oil and refractory organics, Micro -screening, ultra -filtration, 
centrifugation and other advanced physical methods - aerobic/anaerobic digestion, 
anaerobic filtration, novel methods of aeration etc.,  
 
Combined physico -chemical and biological processes, Pure oxygen systems, Filtration for 
high quality effluents, Multistage treatment systems, Land treatment and other resources 
recovery systems. Decen tralised wastewater treatment systems; Reliability and cost 
effectiveness of wastewater systems. Natural treatment systems - floating aquatic plant 
treatment systems, constructed wetlands. Industrial Wastewater management and reuse, 
removal of industry spec ific pollutants   
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Metcalf & Eddy., Wastewater Engineering - Treatment and Reuse (Revised by G. 
Tchobanoglous, F. L. Burton and H. D. Stensel), Tata McGraw Hill.  
2. PeavyH. S.,Rowe D. R.,and Tchobanoglous G., Environmental Engineering, McG raw-Hill 
InternationalEdition.  
3. Nemerow N. L and Dasgupta A., Industrial and Hazardous Waste Treatment, Van 
Nostarnd Reinhold (New York).  
4. Arceivala S.J. and Asolekar S.R., Wastewater Treatment for Pollution Control and 
Reuse, Tata McGraw Hill.  
5. Eckenfelder, W. W., Industrial Water Pollution Control, McGraw -Hill. 
6. Nemerow, N. L., Zero Pollution for Industry: Waste Minimization through Industrial 
Complexes, John Wiley & Sons.  
7. Cites R W., Middlebrooks E J., Reed S C., Natural wastewater Treatment Systems, CRC 
Taylor and Francis.  
8. Patwardhan A.D., Industrial Wastewater Treatment, PHI Learning  
9. S.R. Qasim, Edward and Motley and Zhu, H., “Water Works Engineering – Planning, 
Design and Operation”, Prentice Hall, India.  
10. S. Vigneswaran and C. Visvanathan, “Water Treatment  Processes: Simple Options”, 
CRC Press.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L106  Name: Environmental Economics  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
 
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction to Environmental Economics: Scope of the problem, Interaction between 
economy and environment, Economist’s perspectives on environmental problems.  Brief 
idea about Quality of natural Environment and Environmental problems (Air Pollution, 
Water Pollution, Toxic Emission, ecosystem health).Introduction to Environmental Policy 
Instruments: Choice of p olicy instrument, command and control instruments, taxation, 
tradable permits, Environmental performance bonds  
Public and environmental goods, negative externality and market failure, Internalization 
Environmental Valuation: Contingent valuation methods, t ravel cost method, hedonic price Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
49 
 method  
Economics of natural resources: Natural Resources (renewable and non -renewable), 
Population dynamics, extraction of non -renewable resources, depletion, resource modeling,  
Green and Natural resource accounting: GDP, NDP and sustainable development, 
Environmental accounting  
Social efficiency and benefit -cost analysis: Efficiency and competitive markets, supply, 
demand and efficiency, benefit and cost analysis  
Sustainable development and irreversibility in environmenta l policy: definition, economical 
efficiency, economic growth and environment  
Global Environmental Issues and policies: Climate Change: Causes; possible effects; costs 
of mitigating green house gas emissions; Carbon Trading, adaptation measures, Design of 
international agreements, Environmental conflict, bargaining and cooperation, 
Environmental issues and policies in India  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. KolstadC.D., Environmental Economics, Oxford University Press.  
2. Conrad J. M., Resource Economics. Cambridge University Press  
3. Bhattacharya R.N., Environmental economics: an Indian perspective, Oxford University 
Press, New Delhi.  
4. Hanley N., Shogren, J. F., and White, B., Environmental economics in theory and 
practice. Oxford university press, New York.  
5. CommonM. and Stagi, S., Ecological Economics an introduction, Cambridge University 
Press.  
6. GraftonR. Q. andAdamowicz W., The economics of the environment and natural 
resources, Wiley Blackwell Publication.  
7. Baumol W.J. and OatesE.E., The Theory of Environmental Polic y, Cambridge University 
Press  
8. TitenbergT., Environmental Economics and Policy, Addision -Wesley  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L107  Name: Environmental Hydraulics  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction to the principles of fluid dynamics, continuity, momentum and energy 
equations, Basic concepts in friction and flow in pipes, Flow formulation, turbulent and 
viscous flow, Hardy -Cross, Tong O Conner and other methods of analysis of pipe networks, 
Basic concepts in open channel hydraulics, Energy and mome ntum equations, critical flow, 
channel control and transitions, uniform flow, gradually varied flow, flow profiles and their 
computation, unsteady flow, hydraulic jumps, Design of drainage systems, Ground water 
hydraulics, estimation of aquifer parameters,  confined and unconfined aquifers, steady and 
unsteady flow into wells, Dupuit approximations, single and multi -well system, well losses, 
recharging, well developments etc., movement of pollutants in ground water and 
wastewater treatment plants hydraulics.  Different Flow measurement devices in channels 
and pipes  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Chow V T, Flow through open channel, McGraw -Hill, 1973.  
2. Ranga Raju K. G., Flow through Open Channels, Second edition, TATA McGraw -Hill, 
1997.  
3. Garde R. J. and Ranga Raju K. G., Mechanics of sediment transportation and alluvial 
stream problems, Third edition, New Age International (P) Limited, New Delhi, 2000.  
4. Bhave P. R., Analysis of Flow in Water Distribution Network, Technomic Publishing Co., 
Lancaster, USA, 1996.  
5. Todd D. K. Groundwater Hydrology , John Wiley publishers , 2004  
6. Jacob and  Bear, Hydraulics of Groundwater, McGraw Hill, 1997  
7. Raghunath, Groundwater & Well Hydraulics, Wiley Eastern Ltd, New Delhi, 1992  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
50 
 Subject Code: 
CE6L108  Name: Solid Waste Management  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
 
Prerequisite: None  
Solid waste management: Sources, Composition and Properties of Municipal Solid Waste, 
Engineering principles; Generation, Onsite handling, storage and processing including 
segregation; Collection, Recycling, Transfer and transport,Waste processing, Recovery of 
resources, Waste processing technologies, Biological, chemical and thermal technologies – 
Composting, Anaerobic digestion, Incineration and pyrolysis,Disposal of solid waste 
including sanitary landfill, planning, sit ing, design, closure and post -closure monitoring; 
Regional/Integrated solid waste management related issues. Principles of E -waste 
Management.  
Biomedical waste: Regulatory framework, categorization; generation, collection, transport, 
treatment and disposal . 
Hazardous Waste Fundamentals,   Definition, Classification, Generation, Regulatory 
process, Current Management Practices, Treatment and Disposal Methods, Physicochemical 
processes, Biological processes, Stabilization and solidification; Thermal methods;  Land 
disposal, Remediation of Contaminated Sites.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Tchobanoglous G., Theisen H., and Vigil S.A., Integrated Solid Waste Management:  
Principles and Management Issues, McGraw Hill Book Company, 1993.  
2. Peavy H. S., Rowe D. R. and Tchoban oglous G., Environmental Engineering, McGraw -
Hill International Edition.  
3. LaGrega, M.D., Buckingham P.L., and Evans J.C., Hazardous Waste Management, 
McGraw -Hill International Editions, 1994.  
4. Martin E.J. and Johnson J.H., Hazardous Waste Management Engineer ing, van 
Nostrand -Reinhold, 1987.  
5. Wentz C.A., Hazardous Waste Management, 2nd Edition, McGraw Hill, 1995  
6. VesilindP.A., Worrell W and Reinhart, Solid waste Engineering, Thomson Learning Inc., 
Singapore, 2002.  
7. CPHEEO, Manual on Municipal Solid waste management, Central Public Health and 
Environmental Engineering Organisation, Government of India, New Delhi, 2000.  
8. Bhatia, S. Solid and Hazardous Waste Management, Atlantic Publishers & Distributors  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L109  Name: Industrial Pollution Prevention  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
 
Prerequisite: None  
Principles and techniques for industrial pollution prevention and waste minimization; Nature 
and characteristics of industrial wastes; Prevention versus control of industrial pollution; 
Source reduction tools and techniques:raw material substitution, toxic use reduction and 
elimination, process modification and procedural changes; Recycling and reuse; 
Opportunities and barriers to cleaner technologies; Pollution prevention economics; Waste 
audits, emission inventories and waste management hierarchy for process industries; 
Material balance approach;  
Material and process mapping approach; Emission sources; Estimation of fugitive 
emissions; Environmental impact of VOCs; Energy and resource (material  and water) 
audits for efficient usage and conservation. Unit operations in separation technology; 
Pollution prevention for unit operations: Boilers and Heat Exchangers;  
Storage tanks; Distillation columns; Application of separation technologies for pollut ion 
prevention; Process optimization for cleaner industrial processes: Flow sheet analysis: 
qualitative and quantitative approaches using mass exchange networks; Thermodynamic 
constraints to waste minimization; Holistic and critical technology assessment; 
Environmental performance indicators; Concept of industrial ecology and symbiosis of eco -
parks. Case studies on industrial applications of cleaner technologies in chemical, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
51 
 metallurgical, pulp and paper, textile, electroplating, leather, dairy, cement and other 
industries. Presently used wastewater treatment systems such as MBR, MBBR, SBR, UASB 
reactor, Anammox, etc  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Freeman H. M. Industrial Pollution Prevention Handbook, McGraw Hill.  
2. Shen T. T., Industrial Pollution Prevention, Springer  
3. Bishop P.E. Pollution Prevention: Fundamentals and Practice, McGraw Hill.  
4. Allen D.T. and Rosselot, K.S. Pollution Prevention for Chemical Processes, John Wiley.  
5. Allen D.T., Bakshani, N. and Rosselot, K.S., Pollution Prevention: Homework and 
Design Problems for Engineering Curricula, American Institute for Pollution Prevention, 
and Center for Waste Reduction Technologies.  
6. Johansson A., Clean Technology, Lewis Publi shers, Boca Raton . 
7. Theodore, L. and McGuinn, Y. C.Pollution prevention, Van Nostrand Reinhold, NewYork.  
8. Eckenfelder, W. W., Industrial Water Pollution Control, McGraw -Hill. 
9. Nemerow, N. L., Zero Pollution for Industry: Waste Minimization through Industrial 
Complexes, John Wiley & Sons.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L110  Name: Environmental Chemistry and 
Microbiology  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Prerequisite: None  
Environmental chemistry -basic concepts from general chemistry, Chemical equations, 
chemical reactions, calculation from chemical reactions, solutions, activity and activity 
coefficients, Chemical Equilibria and Kinetics Fundamentals, Acid -Base equilibria – 
fundamentals, equilibrium diagrams, Acidity, Alkalinity, Buffers and Buffer Intensity, 
Chemical equili brium calculations, pC -pH diagram, Langelier index, Solubility diagram, 
Oxidation and Reduction equilibria.  
Water and wastewater quality parameters and their analysis, Basic concepts of quantitative 
analytical chemistry, instrumental methods of analysis.  
Types of microorganisms found in the environment, Metabolic classification of organisms, 
Enzyme and enzyme kinetics,  indicator organisms, coliforms - fecal coliforms - E.coli, 
Streptococcus fecalis differentiation of coliforms - significance - MPN index, M.F. technique, 
standards, Microbiological Parameter Analysis, Measurements and Isolation of 
Microorganism, Different Cultures, Media and Techniques of Staining and Enumeration of 
microorganism, Staining and detection of microbes, Methods of enumerating mi crobes, 
Multiple tube fermentation technique, Membrane filter technique.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Sawyer, C.N. and McCarty, P.L., and Parkin, G.F. Chemistry for Environmental 
Engineers, 4th Edition, McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1994.  
2. Benefield, Judkins and Weand – Process Chemistry for Water and Wastewater 
Treatment, Prentice Hall  
3. Maier R. M., Pepper I. L., and Gerba C. P., Environmental Microbiology, Second Edition, 
Elsevier - AP, 2009.  
4. Pelczar, Jr, M.J., Chan, E.C.S., Krieg, R.N., and Pelczar M. F, Microbiology, 5thEdn., Tata 
McGraw -Hill Publishing Company Limited, New Delhi, 1996.  
5. Rittman B, McCarty P L McCarty P, Environmental Biotechnology: Principles and 
Applications, 2nd Edition, McGraw -Hill, 2000  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L111  Name: Highway Environment and Noise 
Pollution Control  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
 
Prerequisite: None  
Sources and Classification of Noise, Effects of Noise, Noise Measuring Instruments and 
Survey: Sound level meter, audiometer, dose meter, octave band analyzer; Noise Indices: Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
52 
 Leq, Ldn, TNI, NII,  Noise Control Measures: noise control at source, path and receiver, 
acoustic barriers, enclosures, control of machinery noise, community and industrial noise 
control strategies; Noise Standards in India and Abroad; Noise Impact Assessment and 
Prediction T echniques.  
Human factors in road user behaviour, vehicle characteristics, driver, road and 
environment. Environmental Factors: impacts and mitigation measures of air quality, noise, 
severance, visual intrusion, impact on water quality, use of limited resources, impact on 
flora & fauna, vibration, dust ; Transport related pollution. Urban and non urban traffic 
noise sources, Noise pollution. Traffic calming, Measures, Road transport related air 
pollution, sources of air pollution, effects of weather con ditions, Vehicular emission 
parameters, pollution standards, measurement and analysis of vehicular emission; control 
measures; EIA requirements of Highways projects.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Tripathy D.P., Noise Pollution, APH Pub., New Delhi.  
2. Sengupta M., Environmental Engineering (Vol. 2), CRC Press, Boca Raton.  
3. Pandey G.N. and Carney G.C., Environmental Engineering, Tata McGrawHill, New Delhi.  
4. Beranek L., Noise and Vibration Control, McGrawHill Co, NY.  
5. Trivedy P.R. Int. Encyclopedia of Ecology & Environme nt, Noise Pollution (Vol. 13), 
IIEE, New Delhi.  
6. Wark K., Warner C.F. and Davi, W.T., Air Pollution: Its Origin and Control, Prentice 
Hall. 
7. Boubel R.W. Fundamentals of Air Pollution, Academic Press.  
8. Vallero D., Fundamentals of Air Pollution, Academic Press.  
9. Canter L., Environmental Impact Assessment, McGraw -Hill International.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L112  Name: Environmental Nanotechnology 
and Applications  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction to nanotechnology, Nanotechnology for reduced wasteand improved energy 
efficiency, Nanotechnology based water treatment strategies, nanomaterials -microporous 
materials, carbon nanotubes, photocatalystsetc, synthesis of nanocrystals and membranes, 
properties, environmental application, Development of c arbon nanotubes (CNTs), structure 
and properties of fullerene, C60, carbon nanotube and fibre, CNT synthesis – mechanism 
and commercial techniques, organized assembly of CNTs, possible applications of CNTs, 
Environmental applications – adsorption, hydrogen  storage, photocatalysts preparation and 
characterizationUV induced hydrophobicity, modified photocatalysts, application of 
photocatalysts in environmental treatment, nanoscale biometal for subsurface remediation, 
Sensing materials, introduction to novel s ensing materials, operation principle, sensors – 
mass and optical sensors, nano -sensing systems and applications.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Wiesner M., Bottero J -Y.,  Environmental Nanotechnology : Applications and Impacts of  
Nanomaterials Applications and Im pacts of Nanomaterials, McGraw Hill Professional.  
2. Pradeep T., Textbook of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, McGraw Hill Education 
(India) Private Limited  
3. Mittal V., Nanocomposites with Biodegradable Polymers: Synthesis, Properties, and 
Future perspectives., Oxford University Press  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L113  Name: Water Quality Modeling and 
Management  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Water quality description, various characteristics of water, water quality criteria and 
standards, elements of reaction kinetics, spatial and temporal aspects of contaminant Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
53 
 transport, transport mechanism -advection, diffusion, dispersion; River and streams , 
convective diffusion equation and its application. Estuaries, Estuarine hydraulics, Estuarine 
water quality models; Lakes and reservoirs, eutrophication; Numerical/mathematical 
modelling of environmental systems, subsystems, and pollutant transport proce sses 
Contaminant transport in unsaturated flows, solute transport models for conservative 
species, solute transport in spatially variable soils; Contaminant transports in ground water 
advection, dispersion, one dimensional transport with linear adsorption, dua l porosity 
models, numerical models, bio degradation reaction; Water quality management, socio -
economic aspects of water quality management, management alternatives for water quality 
control, waste load allocation process, lake quality management, ground w ater 
remediation.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Ramaswami A., Milford J. B., Small M. J., Integrated Environmental Modeling - 
Pollutant Transport, Fate, and Risk in the Environment John Wiley & Sons, 2005.  
2. Burrough P.A. and McDonnell R.A., Principles of Geographic al Information Systems, 
Oxford University Press, 1998.  
3. Snape J.B., Dunn I.J.,Ingham J., and Prenosil J., Dynamics of environmental 
bioprocesses, modelling and simulation Weinheim: VCH, 1995.  
4. International Water Association - Activated sludge modelling ASM 1 and ASM2  
5. Chapra S. C., Surface Water Quality Modeling, McGraw -Hil, Inc., New York, 1997.  
6. Garde R. J., and Ranga Raju K. G., Mechanics of sediment transportation and alluvial 
stream problems, Third edition, New Age International (P) Limited, New Delhi  
7. Thomann, R.V. and Mueller, J.A. Principles of surface water quality modeling and 
control, Pearson, 1987  
8. Chapra, S.C. Surface water quality modelling, Waveland Press, INC., 1997  
9. Schnoor, J.L., Environmental Modeling Wiley, John & Sons, 1997  
10. Thomann, R.V., Systems Analysis and Water Quality Management, McGraw Hill, 1972  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L513  Name: Water Resources Planning and 
Management  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisites: None   
Introduction to issues in planning and management; Role of water resources systems 
modelling; Decision support systems (DSS); Simulation models; Optimization methods; 
Dynamic programming; Application in reservoir operation, etc.; Linear programming; Multi -
objective optimization; Modelling uncertainty; Sensitivity and uncertainty analyses; 
Advances in modelling; Fuzzy optimization -applications in reservoir storage, water quality 
studies, etc.; Artificial neural networks; Genetic algorithms; Data mining; Flood 
management; Flood plain modelling; Managing risk; Risk reduction; Decisio n support and 
prediction; Reliability -resilience -vulnerability (RRV) analysis; Drought management; 
Causes, types and impacts; Impact of climate change; Drought monitoring; Drought 
triggers; S -D-F analysis of droughts using copulas.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Loucks, D. P., and Van Beek, E., Water Resources Systems Planning and Management: 
An Introduction to Methods, Models and Applications, the UNESCO, Paris, 2005.  
2. Loucks, D. P., Stedinger, J.R., and Haith, D. A., Water Resources Systems  Planning  
and Analysis,  Prentice -Hall, NJ, 1981.  
3. Vedula, S., and Mujumdar, P. P., Water Resources  Systems: Modelling  Techniques  
and Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 2007.  
4. Jain, S.K., and Singh, V. P., Water Resources Systems Planning and Management, 
Developments in Wate r Science, Vol. 51, Elsevier Science, New York, 2003.  
5. Govindaraju, R. S., and Rao, A. R., Artificial Neural Networks in Hydrology, Water 
Science and Technology Library, Volume 36, Springer Netherlands, 2000.  
6. Raju, K. S., and Kumar D. N., Multicriterion Ana lysis in Engineering and Management, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
54 
 Prentice -Hall, India, 2014.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L514  Name: Design of Pipe Networks  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisites: None  
Introduction to flow hydraulics and network analysis; Basic principles of pipe flow; Fittings 
and valves; Pipe network analysis, pipe network geometry, branched and looped networks; 
Multi-Input source water network analysis; Cost considerations, Life cycle costing, Relative 
cost factor;  General principles of network synthesis, constraints , parameters for network 
sizing, reliability considerations; Water transmission lines, gravity mains, pumping mains; 
Water distribution mains; Single -input source branched systems; Single -input source 
looped systems; Multi -input source branched systems; Mu lti-input source looped systems; 
Decomposition of a large multi -input, looped network; Optimal water supply zone size.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Swamee, P. K., and Sharma, A. K.,Design of Water Supply Pipe Networks, John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., New Jersey, 2008.  
2. Bhave, P. R., Analysis of Flow in Water Distribution Networks, Technomic Publishing; 
Lancaster, 1991.  
3. Surhone, L. M., Tennoe, M. T., Henssonow, S. F.,Pipe Network Analysis, VDM 
Publishing, Germany, 2010.  
4. Jeppson, R. W., Analysis of flow in pipe networks, An n Arbor Science Publishers, Inc., 
Ann Arbor, 1976.  
5. Mays, L. W., Water Distribution Systems Handbook, McGraw -Hill Education, New York, 
1999.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L515  Name: GIS and Remote Sensing 
Applications in Civil Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
 
Pre-requisites: None  
Remote sensing; Energy source; Spectral signatures; Remote sensing satellites and 
sensors; Radar image interpretation; Digital image processing; Image classification; 
Principal component transformation; Applications in watershed manage ment, flood 
management, groundwater quality, reservoir sedimentation, irrigation management. 
Geographic information systems (GIS); Raster and vector data; GIS for Surface -Water 
Hydrology; Digital elevation models; Hydrographic vector data; Arc -hydro model;  GIS for 
groundwater modeling; GIS for flood plain management; HEC -RAS and HEC -GeoRAS; Case 
studies.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Lillesand, T., Kiefer, R. W., and Chipman, J., Remote Sensing and Image 
Interpretation, Seventh Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York,  2015.  
2. Burrough, P. A., and McDonnell, R. A., Principles of Geographical Information Systems, 
Second Edition,Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998.  
3. Richards, J. A., Remote Sensing Digital Image Analysis: An Introduction, Fifth Edition, 
Springer -Verlag Berl in Heidelberg, 2013.  
4. Johnson, L. E., Geographic Information Systems in Water Resources Engineering, CRC 
Press, Boca Raton, 2008.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L516  Name: Non -Point Source Pollution of 
Water Resources  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
 
Pre-requisites: None  
Basic concept of water pollution; Water quality standards pertaining to drinking, irrigation 
and aquatic life; Water quality analysis methods and instruments used; Concept and Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
55 
 behaviour of point and nonpoint source pollution (NPS); Sources of NPS pollution ; 
Pathways and assessment of NPS pollutants; linkage between water pollution and 
hydrology; Application of hydrologic models in NPS pollution assessment at watershed 
scale; Quantification and control of NPS pollution from agricultural watersheds; Nitrogen,  
Phosphorus, pesticides and water quality impacts; Impacts of mining and forestry; 
Watershed -scale NPS pollution models; Optimum management strategy; Best management 
practices for NPS pollution control.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Novotny, V., Water Quality: Dif fuse Pollution and Watershed Management, Second 
Edition, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 2003.  
2. Ritter, W. F., Shirmohammadi, A., Agricultural Nonpoint Source Pollution: Watershed 
Management and Hydrology, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2001.  
3. Brooks, K. N., Ffolliot t, P., F., and Magner, J. A., Hydrology and the Management of 
Watersheds, Fourth Edition, Wiley -Blackwell, New York, 2012.  
4. Das, M. M., Saikia, M., Watershed Management, PHI Learning, Delhi, 2012.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L518  Name: Integrated Watershed 
Management  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction to integrated approach for the management of watersheds; Watershed 
hydrology: runoff and sediment load estimation; Instrumentation, and monitoring of hydro -
meteorological variables at watershed -scale; Discharge measurement, sediment 
(suspended and bed load) measurement; Control of soil erosion; GIS for integration of 
different aspects of watersheds;  Rainwater management: rainwater harvesting, artificial 
recharge, types and design of wat er harvesting and recharge structures; Irrigation 
management: use of conserved water;  Land degradation, soil quality and water quality 
aspects, soil conservation strategies, water conveyance structures -spillways, culverts, 
etc.; Droughts: causes, types, dr ought indices, control and adaptation strategies; 
Drainage: estimation of drainage coefficient, design of surface and subsurface drainage 
systems, control of soil salinity;  Climate change: general circulation models (GCMs), IPCC 
climate change scenarios, i mpacts of climate change and land use change on watersheds; 
Case studies  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Brooks, K. N., Ffolliott, P., F., and Magner, J. A., Hydrology and the Management of 
Watersheds, Fourth Edition, Wiley -Blackwell, New York, 2012.  
2. Das, M. M., Sai kia, M., Watershed Management, PHI Learning, Delhi, 2012.  
3. Ven Te Chow, Maidment, D. and Mays, L.W., Applied Hydrology, Second Edition, 
McGraw -Hill Inc., New York, 2013.  
4. Heathcote, I. W., Integrated Watershed Management: Principles and Practice, Second 
Edition, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., NJ, 2009.  
5. Gregersen, H. M., Ffolliott, P. F., Brooks, K. N., Integrated Watershed Management: 
Connecting People to Their Land and Water, CAB International, UK, 2007.  
6. Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability , Working Group Report II, 
IPCC Fifth Assessment Report of the IPCC.  
7. Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change, Working Group Report III, IPCC 
Fifth Assessment Report of the IPCC.  
8. Mujumdar, P. P., and Kumar D. N., Floods in a Changing Climate: Hydrologic Modeling, 
International Hydrology Series, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 2012.  
Subject Code: 
CE6L216  Name: Geotechnics of Polluted Sites  
 L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Pre-requisites: None  
Basic concepts related to soil pollution; Sources of pollution: industrial areas, agricultural, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
56 
 municipal, nuclear; types of contaminants; Role of physical and chemical properties of soil 
in contamination; Factors effecting retention and transport of conta minants; Soil sampling 
collection and characterization: sampling of contaminated soil, site investigation and 
monitoring parameters, exploratory site investigation, methods of analysis/identification, 
sample handling, preservation, transportation and storage; Non -destructive techniques of 
site characterization: electrical and thermal properties, GPR; Soil and ground water 
remediation: conceptual approach to soil and ground water remediation, risk assessment, 
methodologies and selection of treatment mod els; Soil remediation: excavation, soil 
washing, stabilization/solidification; Soil vapor extraction, electrokinetic remediation, 
thermal desorption, vitrification; Bioremediation, phytoremediation, soil fracturing; 
Groundwater Remediation: selection of te chnique, pump and treat, in -situ flushing; 
Groundwater Remediation: permeable reactive barriers, in -situ air sparging, monitored 
natural attenuation, bioremediation; Green and sustainable remediation; Case studies on 
polluted sites and issues related to en vironment.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Sharma, H.D., and Reddy, K.R., Geoenvironmental Engineering: Site Remediation, 
Waste Containment, and Emerging Waste Management Technologies, John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 2004, 992p. (ISBN: 0 -471-21599 -6).  
2. Reddy, K.R., and Cameselle, C. Editors, Electrochemical Remediation Technologies for 
Polluted Soils, Sediments and Groundwater, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New 
Jersey, 2009, 760p. (ISBN: 0 -470-38343 -7).  
3. Reddy, K.R., and Adams, J.A., Sustainable Rem ediation of Contaminated Sites, 
Momentum Press, New York, December 2014 (ISBN: 9781606505205).  
4. Rowe R.K.,"Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering Handbook" Kluwer 
Academic Publications, London, 2000.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L217  Name: Geotechnics of Waste and waste 
Containment  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Pre-requisites: None  
Sources and types of wastes; Environmental and engineering properties of wastes; New 
and developing government policies; Beneficial re -use of wastes; Fundamentals of waste -
soil interaction; Containment systems and basic principles; Lining and capping systems; 
Leachate and gas collection systems; Compacted soi liners; Admixed soil liners; 
Geosynhtetic clay liners; Geomembranes; Drainage layers; Geosynhtetic composites; 
Seepage flo w; Contaminant transport; Landfill settlement; Landfill slope stability; 
Conventional caps, ET caps; Ground water monitoring; Landfill gas; Post -closure 
monitoring; Bioreactor landfills; Landfill mining; End -use of closed landfills; 
Impoundments; Integrate d waste management and alternative landfills.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. H.D. Sharma and K.R. Reddy Geo -environmental Engineering: Site Remediation, Waste 
Containment, and Emerging Waste Management Technologies, John Wiley, New Jersey, 
2004.  
2. R.N. Yong, Geoenvironmental Engineering: Contaminated Ground: Fate of Pollutions 
and Remediation, Thomson Telford, 2000.  
3. L.N. Reddy & H.I. Inyang, Geoenvironmental Engineering: Principles and Applications, 
Marcel Dek, 2000.  
4. Raju, V.S., Datta, M., Seshadri, V., and Ag arwal, V.K. (1996) (Eds.), “Ash Ponds and 
Ash Disposal Systems”, Narosa Publishers, Delhi,424 pages.  
5. Datta, M. (1997) (Ed.), “Waste Disposal in Engineered Landfills”, Narosa Publishers, 
Delhi, 231 pages.  
6. Datta, M., Parida, B.P., Guha, B.K. and Sreekrishnan , T., (1999) (Eds.), “Industrial 
Solid Waste Management and Landfilling Practice”, Narosa Publishers, Delhi, 204 
pages.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
57 
 7. David E. Daniel, Geotechnical Practice for Waste Disposal, Published by Chapman & 
Hall, London, 1993.  
8. Bagchi,A.,"Design of landfills and  integrated solid waste management" John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., USA, 2004.  
9. Qian, X., R. M. Koerner, and D. H. Gray.  Geotechnical Aspects of Landfill Design and 
Construction. New Jersey: Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, 2002.  
 
Subject Code: 
ES6L104  Name: Gr oundwater Modeling and 
Simulation  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisites: None  
Data requirement; Aquifer configuration and hydraulic parameters; Subsurface 
Groundwater flow equation; Conceptual modelling; Aquifer geometry; Model boundary; 
Model design; Model calibration; Simulation techniques; Solute transport modelling; 
Groundwater modelling examples from India.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Damena, T, Mathematical Modelling and Simulation on Groundwater Flow: The study of 
groundwater flow with computer aided m athematical methods, LAP LAMBERT Academic 
Publishing.  
2. Refsgaard, J.C., Kovar, K. Haarder, E. and Nygaard, E., Calibration and Reliability in 
Groundwater Modelling: Credibility of Modelling (IAHS Proceedings & Reports), 
International Association of Hydrological Sciences.  
3. Rushton, K.R., Groundwater Hydrology: Conceptual and Computational Models, Wiley.  
 
Subject Code: 
MA6L001  Name : Mathematical Methods  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Prerequisite: None  
Probability and Statistics : Random variables (rv) and their properties, some standard  
discrete and continuous rv, Expectation, Variance, moments, moment generating functions, 
functions of a rv, their distribution and moments, joint, marginal and conditional 
distribution and independence of rvs, Hypothesis tes ting.  
Numerical solutions of systems of linear equations: Gauss elimination, LU decomposition, 
Gauss -Jacobi and Gauss -Seidel methods.  
Numerical methods of ODE and PDE: Runge -Kutta and finite difference methods for ODE, 
Finite difference methods for solvin g 2-D Laplace’s equation, Poisson’s equation, 1 -D heat 
equation : Bender Schmidt, Crank Nicholson method and Du Fort Frankel methods, 1 -D 
wave equation using Explicit method. Consistency and stability analysis.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Grawel B.S. Numerical M ethods  
2. Jain M.K., Iyengar S.R.K. and Jain R.K., Numerical Methods -problem and solutions, 
Wiley Eastern Limited, 2001.  
3. Ross S. Introduction to Probability Models, Wiley India  
4. Gun A.M., Gupta M.K. and Gupta B.S. Fundamentals of Statistics  
5. Hayter A.J., Probability and Statistics, Duxbury, 2002  
6. Scarborough J.B., Numerical mathematical analysis, Oxford & IBH Publishing 
Co.Pvt.,2000  
7. Hamming R.W., Numerical Methods for Scientist and Engineers, McGraw Hill, 1998  
8. Mathews J.H. and Fink, K.D., Numerical Methods using MATLAB, Pearson Education, 
2004.  
 
Subject Code: 
MA6L002  Name: Advanced Techniques in  
Operation Research  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
58 
 Prerequisite: None  
One variable unconstrained optimization, multivariable unconstrained optimisation, Karush -
Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions for constrained optimization, quadratic programming, 
separable programming, convex and non convex programming, steepest and Quasi -Newton 
method.  
Dynamic Programming: Characteristics of dynamic problems, deterministic dynamic 
programming an d probabilitistic dynamic programming, Network analysis, Shortest path  
problems, minimum spanning tree problem, maximum flow problem, minimum cost flow 
problem, network simplex, interior point methods, stochastic programming, Nonlinear goal 
programming app lications, Geometric Programming.  
Multi-objective Optimization Problems: Linear and non linear programming problems,  
Weighting and Epsilon method, P -norm methods, Gradient Projection Method, STEM 
method, Convex Optimization.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Rao S.S.,  Engineering Optimization Theory and Practices, John Wiley and Sons, 2009  
2. Ehrgott., M. Multi -criteria Optimization, Springer 2006  
3. Miettien K.M., Non -linear multi -objective optimization, Kluwers International Series, 
2004 
4. Deb K., Multi -Objective Optimization using Evolutionary Algorithms, John Wiley & Sons, 
2001.  
 
 
 
  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
59 
 Dual Degree (B.Tech. Civil Engineering and M.Tech. Structural  Engineering)  
Curriculum ( 7th Semester – 8th Semester)  
SEMESTER - VII 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Breadth - 4   3/4 3/4  
Dynamics of Structures  CE6L301  3-1-0 4 4 61 
Advanced Structural Analysis   CE6L302  3-1-0 4 4 61 
Elective -1  3-0-0 3 3  
CAD Laboratory  CE4P001  0-0-3 2 3 62 
Industrial Training Defence  CE4T001  0-0-0 2 0  
Project  – Part 1 (CE)  CE4D001  0-0-0 4 0  
  Total  22/23  17/18   
SEMESTER – VIII  
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Advanced Solid Mechanics  CE6L303  3-1-0 4 4 62 
Elective – 2  3-0-0 3 3  
Elective – 3  3-0-0 3 3  
Elective – 4  3-1-0 4 4  
Design of Special Structures  CE6P303  0-0-6 4 6 62 
Project – Part 2 (CE)  CE4D002  0-0-0 6 0  
  Total  24 20  
SEMESTER – IX 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Elective -5  3-0-0 3 3  
Advanced Structural Laboratory  CE6P301  0-0-3 2 3 62 
Thesis : Part -I (CE)  CE6D001  0-0-0 12  0  
  Total  17 6  
SEMESTER – X 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Seminar   0-0-0 2 0  
Computational Laboratory  CE6P302  0-0-3 2 3 63 
Thesis : Part -I (CE)  CE6D002  0-0-0 12  0  
  Total  16 3  
 
Elective -1 
Subject Name  Subject 
Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Advanced Transportation Engineering  CE4L003  3-0-0 3 3 63 
Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling  CE4L004  3-0-0 3 3 63 
Maintenance and Rehabilitation of Concrete  
Structures  CE4L005  3-0-0 3 3 64 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
60 
 Computational Hydraulics  CE4L006  3-0-0 3 3 64 
Hydraulic and Hydrologic Analysis and 
Design  CE4L008  3-0-0 3 3 64 
Bridge Engineering  CE4L022  3-0-0 3 3 65 
Prestressed Concrete  CE4L023  3-0-0 3 3 65 
Advanced Foundation Engineering  CE4L042  3-0-0 3 3 65 
Numerical Methods in Geotechnical 
Engineering  CE4L043  3-0-0 3 3 66 
Soil Engineering  CE4L044  3-0-0 3 3 66 
Earth Retaining Structures  CE4L045  3-0-0 3 3 66 
Open Channel Hydraulics  CE4L053  3-0-0 3 3 67 
Water Resources Systems  CE4L054  3-0-0 3 3 67 
Design of Hydraulic Structures  CE4L055  3-0-0 3 3 67 
Pavement Design  CE4L062  3-0-0 3 3 68 
NB: Any other subjects of same or higher level floated by any other specialisations of SIF or any other 
Schools can also be taken as an elective, as suggested by faculty advisor/PG Coordinator  
 
Elective - 1 to 5 
Name  Subject 
Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Advanced Concrete Technology  CE6L304  3-0-0 3 3 68 
Theory of Plates & Shells  CE6L305  3-1-0 4 4 69 
Seismic Design of Structures  CE6L306  3-1-0 4 4 69 
Bridge Engineering  CE6L307  3-0-0 3 3 69 
Infrastructure Maintenance and Rehabilitation  CE6L308  3-0-0 3 3 70 
Modern Construction Materials  CE6L309  3-0-0 3 3 70 
Advanced construction Techniques  CE6L310  3-0-0 3 3 71 
Construction Project Management  CE6L311  3-0-0 3 3 71 
Advanced Design of RC Structures  CE6L312  3-1-0 4 4 72 
Mathematical Methods  MA6L001  3-1-0 4 4 72 
Advanced Techniques in Operation Research  MA6L002  3-1-0 4 4 73 
Nonlinear Functional Analysis  MA7L020  3-1-0 4 4 73 
Hydraulics of Sediment Transport  CE6L008  3-0-0 3 3 74 
Advanced Transportation Systems Analysis  CE6L017  3-0-0 3 3 74 
Analysis and Design of Pavements  CE6L018  3-0-0 3 3 74 
Pavement Evaluation, Maintenance and 
Rehabilitation  CE6L019  3-0-0 3 3 75 
Dynamics of Soil and Foundations  CE6L020  3-0-0 3 3 75 
Soil-Structure Interaction  CE6L021  3-0-0 3 3 75 
Ground Improvement  CE6L022  3-0-0 3 3 76 
Computational Geomechanics  CE6L023  3-0-0 3 3 76 
Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering  CE6L024  3-0-0 3 3 76 
Geotechnical Risk and Reliability  CE6L025  3-0-0 3 3 77 
Advanced Soil Mechanics  CE6L026  3-0-0 3 3 77 
Free Surface Flows  CE6L027  3-0-0 3 3 78 
Applied Elasticity  CE6L028  3-0-0 3 3 78 
Structural Health Monitoring  CE6L029  3-0-0 3 3 78 
NB: Any other subjects of same level floated by any other specialisations of SIF or any other Schools can 
also be taken as an elective, as suggested by faculty advisor/PG Coordinators  
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
61 
 Syllabus  
Subject Code:  
CE6L301  Name:  Dynamics of Structures  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit:  4 
Prerequisite: None  
Single -degree -freedom systems: undamped and damped free vibration; Response to 
harmonic and periodic excitations; Response to non -periodic excitations; Numerical 
evaluation of dynamic response; Generalized single -degree -freedom systems. Elements of 
analyti cal dynamics: The principle of virtual work; Principle of D Alembert; Hamiltons 
principle; Lagrange’s equation. Multi -degree -freedom systems: Equation of motion; 
undamped free vibration; Interpretation of modal orthogonality; Decomposition of 
response in t erms of modal co -ordinates; Modal analysis; Response to external excitations; 
Rayleigh s quotient and its properties; Systems with proportional damping; Systems with 
arbitrary viscous damping. Distributed parameter systems: axial and bending vibration of 
beams; orthogonality of modes; Response to external excitations; Rayleigh s quotient; 
Approximate methods. Earthquake response of linear systems: Earthquake excitations; 
Equations of motion; Response spectrum concept; Response spectrum characteristics; 
Design response spectrum; Modal analysis; Displacement response; Element forces; Modal 
response contribution; Response history analysis; Response spectrum analysis. 
Introduction to Random Vibration; Stationary and non -stationery random processes; 
Ergodic rando m processes. Narrow band and wide band random processes; Properties of 
Autocorrelation and Power spectral density functions; Response to arbitrary excitation by 
Fourier transform method.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Chopra, A.K., Dynamics of Structures: Theory an d Applications to Earthquake 
Engineering, Prentice Hall/Pearson Education  
2. Clough, R.W. and Penzien, J., Dynamics of structures, McGraw Hill, Inc., New York  
3. Craig, R.R., Structural Dynamics: An Introduction to Computer Methods, Wiley New 
York 
4. Meriovitch, L. , Elements of vibration analysis, McGraw -Hill  
5. Rao, S.S., Mechanical Vibrations, Pearson  
6. Thomson , W.T., Theory of Vibration with Application, CRC Press  
7. Newland, D.E., An Introduction to Random Vibrations, Spectral and Wavelet Analysis, 
Courier Dover Publications  
Subject Code:  
CE6L302  Name: Advanced Structural Analysis   L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit:  4 
Prerequisite: None  
Basics of structural analysis: static &  dynamic loading, linear & nonlinear structural 
behaviour, geometric & material nonlinearity, hysteretic behaviour; Classical linear analysis 
of frames and trusses: displacement method, slope deflection equations & matrix 
displacement method, effect of fou ndation settlement and temperature; Geometric 
nonlinear analysis of frames and trusses: displacement method, nonlinear slope -deflection 
equations & nonlinear behaviour, linearized iterative matrix displacement method, 
geometric stiffness matrix, tangent st iffness matrix, P -  effect, buckling of frames, tension 
structures; Material nonlinear analysis of frames: basics of plasticity, distributed plasticity 
& lumped plasticity, incremental nonlinear analysis.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Thandavamoorthy,  T.S., Structural Analysis, Oxford University Press  
2. Weaver , W. and Gere, J.M., Matrix Analysis of Framed Structures, CBS Publisher  
3. Wang, C.K ., Intermediate Structural Analysis, McGraw Hill  
4. Kanchi , M.B., Matrix Methods of Structural Analysis, Wiley Eastern Limited  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
62 
 5. Hibbeler, R.C., Structural Analysis, Pearson  
Subject Code: 
CE4P001  Name: CAD Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit:  2  
Prerequisite: None  
Exposure to commercial software tools for analysis, design and research in civil 
engineering.  
 
Subject Code:  
CE6L303  Name: Advanced Solid Mechanics  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit:4  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction to elasticity theory; Stress analysis: forces and moments, theory of stress, 
principal stresses and stress invariants, compatibility equations, equilibrium equations; 
Strain: deformation and velocity gradient s, Lagrangian and Eulerian description and finite 
strain, small deformation theory, principal strains and strain invariants, compatibility 
conditions; Fundamental physical principles: conservation of mass, linear momentum, 
angular momentum, and energy, sec ond law of thermodynamics; Constitutive theory: St. 
Venant’s principal, linear elasticity and generalized Hook’s law, Stokesian and Newtonian 
fluids, Navier -Stokes equations, Bernoulli equation, linear viscoelasticity, yield criteria; 
Applications: Airy st ress function, two -dimensional elastostatics problems, torsion.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Srinath, L.S., Advanced Mechanics of Solids, Tata McGraw Hill  
2. Timoshenko, S., Strength of Materials, CBS  
3. Bruhns, O.T., Advanced Mechanics of Solids, Springer  
4. Timoshenko,  S., and Goodier, J.N., Theory of Elasticity, Tata McGraw Hill  
5. Chakrabarty, J. Theory of Plasticity , Butterworth -Heinemann  
 
Subject Code:  
CE6P303  Name: Design of Special Structures  L-T-P: 
0-0-6 Credit: 4  
Prerequisite: Advanced Design of RC Structure  
Design of overhead, underground, ground supported water tanks, dams;  Design of 
industrial structures; Design of bunkers and silos; Design of special RC elements: Design 
of slender columns, RC walls, ordinary and shear walls, Corbels, Deep beams, RCC 
chimn ey; Design of simple cylindrical shell roof by beam theory.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Fintel, M., Handbook of Concrete Engineering, CBS Publishers Delhi  
2. Naeim, F., Handbook on Seismic Analysis and Design of Structures, Kluwer Academic 
Publisher  
3. IS 4326, Earthq uake Resistant Design and Construction of Buildings - Code of Practice, 
Bureau of Indian Standard; New Delhi  
4. Jain, S.K. and Jaiswal, O.R., Guidelines for Seismic Design of Liquid Storage Tanks, 
NICEE, IIT Kanpur  
 
Subject Code:  
CE6P301  Name: Advanced Structural Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit: 2  
Prerequisite: None  
Vibration analysis of SDOF system, Modal study, Natural Period determination using free 
and forced vibration, Stress -strain behaviour of MS steel and high strength steel bars. 1g 
shake table test. Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
63 
  
 
Subject Code:  
CE6P302  Name: Computational Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit: 2  
Prerequisite: None  
Finite element modelling of structures, Seismic analysis of structures, Pushover analysis, 
seismic ground response analysis.  
 
 
Subject Code: CE4L003  Name: Advanced Transportation 
Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Airports: introduction; characteristics of aircrafts related to airport design; obstruction 
clearance criteria; design of airside facilities: runway orientation, length, capacity, 
configuration and number, taxiway  layout, design of fillets, high -speed exit taxiway, apron 
gate and circulation areas, hanger; design of landside facilities: terminal building  functional 
areas and facilities, centralized and de -centralized conce pts, vertical distribution; airport 
planning and site selection; pavement design; visual aids; demand estimation of air travel, 
drainage. Railways: - Introduction, classification of routes; railway gauge, coning of wheels 
and canting of rails, train resista nce and hauling power; track components: rails, sleepers, 
fastenings, ballast and formation; track stresses; turnouts and crossings, signals and 
control systems, welded rails. Elements of water and pipeline transportation. Economic 
Analysis of Transportati on Projects  
Book:  
1. Horonjeff, Robert, Planning and Design of Airports, McGraw Hill  
2. Chandra, Satish and Agarwal, M.M., Railway Engineering, Oxford University Press India  
3. Garber, NJ and Hoel, LA, Principles of Traffic and Highway Engineering, Cengage 
Learning  
Subject Code: CE4L004  Name: Rock Mechanics and 
Tunnelling  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction - objective, scope and problems of Rock Mechanics. Classification by origin, 
Lithological, Engineering. Rock exploration - rock coring, geophysical methods. Laboratory 
testing of rocks - all types of compressive strength, tensile strength and flexural strength 
tests. Strength and failure of rocks, Griffith’s theory, Coulombs theory, rheological 
methods. In -situ tests on rock mass. Deformat ion characteristics of rocks, instrumentation 
and measurement of deformation of rocks. Permeability characteristics - interstitial water 
on rocks, unsteady flow of water through jointed rock mass. Mechanical, thermal and 
electrical properties of rock mass.  Correlation between laboratory and field properties. 
Analysis of stresses. Thick wall cylinder, formulae, Kreish equation, Green span method. 
Openings in rock mass and stresses around openings. Pressure tunnels, development of 
plastic zone. Rock support n eeded to avoid plastic deformation. Lined and unlined tunnels. 
Underground excavation and subsidence. Rock mechanics applications. Bearing capacity of 
homogeneous as well as discontinuous rocks. Support pressure and slip of the joint. 
Delineation of types of rock failure. Unsupported span of underground openings, pillars. 
Rock slopes. Rock bolting. Plastic mechanics. Tunnels, shapes, usages, Methods of 
Construction, Problems associated with tunnels, tunnelling in various subsoil conditions and 
rocks.  
Text/R eference Books:  
1. Goodman, R. E., Introduction to Rock Mechanics, John Wiley and Sons.  
2. Hudson, J.A. and Harrison, J.P. Engineering rock Mechanics: an introduction to the Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
64 
 principles, Pergamon publishers.  
3. Chapman, David, Metje, Nicole and Stärk, Alfred, Introduction to Tunnel Construction. 
Spon Publishers, Taylor and Francis Group.  
4. Brady, B. H. G. and Brown, E. T. Rock Mechanics: for underground mining, Kluwer 
Academic Publishers.  
 
Subject Code: CE4L005  Name: Maintenance and 
Rehabilitation of Concrete 
Structures  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Maintenance and Repair strategies - Maintenance, repair and rehabilitation, Facets of 
Maintenance, importance of Maintenance various aspects of Inspection, Assessment 
procedure for evaluating a damaged structure, causes of deterioration; Serviceability and 
Durability of Concrete - Quality assurance for concrete construction concrete properties - 
strength, permeability, thermal properties and cracking. - Effects due to climate, 
temperature, chemicals, corr osion - design and construction errors - Effects of cover 
thickness and cracking; Materials and Techniques for Repair - Special concretes and 
mortar, concrete chemicals, special elements for accelerated strength gain, Expansive 
cement, polymer concrete, su lphur infiltrated concrete, Ferrocement and polymers coating 
for rebars loadings from concrete, mortar and dry pack, vacuum concrete, Gunite and 
Shotcrete, Epoxy injection, Mortar repair for cracks shoring and underpinning. Methods of 
corrosion protection,  corrosion inhibitors, corrosion resistant steels and cathodic 
protection.; Repairs to Structures - Repair of structures distressed due to earthquake – 
Strengthening using FRP Strengthening and stabilization techniques for repair.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Denison Campbell, Allen and Harold Roper, Concrete Structures, Materials, Maintenance 
and Repair, Longman Scientific and Technical UK.  
2. Allen R.T and Edwards S.C, Repair of Concrete Structures, Blakie and Sons, UK.  
3. Raikar, R.N., Learning from failures - Deficiencies in Design, Construction and Service - 
R&D Centre (SDCPL), Raikar Bhavan, Bombay.  
4. Santhakumar A.R., Concrete Technology, Oxford University Press, Printed in India by 
Radha Press, New Delhi.  
5. Emmons, Peter H., Concrete Repair and Maintenance Illustrated Galgotia Publications 
pvt. Ltd.  
 
Subject Code: CE4L006  Name: Computational Hydraulics  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
General numerical methods; Introduction to FEM, FDM and BEM; Perturbation method; 
Methods of characteristics; Hydroinformatics; Applications to water resources engineering  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Michael B. Abbott, Anthony W. Minns, Computational Hydraulics.  
2. Cornelis B. Vreugdenhil, Computational Hydraulics.  
3. Ioana Popescu, Computational Hydraulics.  
 
Subject Code: CE4L008  Name: Hydraulic and Hydrologic 
Analysis and Design  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Synthetic design storms & Estimation of peak discharge, Urban storm drainage design, 
Culvert design, Detention storage design, Flood frequency analysis; Design of water 
distribution network, Analysis and design of mobile and rigid boundary channels, Tractive 
force concepts in channel design, Design of canal headworks, distribution works, and 
cross-drainage works, Design of gravity dams, spillways, and ener gy dissipators.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
65 
 Text/Reference Books:  
1. Ben C. Yen, Yeou -Koung Tung, Reliability and Uncertainty Analyses in Hydraulic 
Design: A Report, American Society of Civil Engineers  
2. Bruce E. Larock, Roland W. Jeppson, Gary Z. Watters, Hydraulics of Pipeline Systems, 
CRC Press  
3. Ghosh, Karunamoy, Analysis and Design Practice of Hydraulic Concrete Structures, PHI 
Learning Pvt. Ltd  
4. Chow, Ven Te, Maidment, David R. and Mays, Larry W., Applied Hydrology, Tata 
McGraw -Hill Education  
 
Subject Code: CE4L022   Name: Bridge Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Types of Bridges and loading standards. Hydraulic Design of Bridges, Foundation for piers 
and abutments, Open Foundation, Pile Foundation, Well Foundation, Bridge Substructure: 
Piers and Abutments. Bridge Superstructure: Design aspects, RC slab deck, Tee Beam and 
Slab deck. Composite Bridges. Pre -stressed concrete bridges, Steel trussed bridges; Bridge 
Construction, Inspection and Maintenance.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Ponnuswamy, S, Bridge Engineering, McGraw Hill  
2. Jagadeesh and Jayaram, Design of Bridge Structure, PHI Learning  
3. Victor, D. J., Essentials of Bridge Engine ering, Oxford and IBH Publishing  
 
Subject Code: CE4L023  Name: Pre -stressed Concrete  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Concept on  Mechanics; Materials; Properties of sections; Stress analysis - three methods; 
Prestressing and Post stressing; Beam design - no tension and ultimate; Poles and slab 
panels; Loss assessment; Composite beams; Design for shear. Large span structures; 
Struct ural forms and design principles; Special materials, open web and built -up 
structures.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Lin and Burns, Design Of Prestressed Concrete Structures, Wiley India  
2. Dayaratnam, P Prestressed Concrete Structures, Oxford and IBH  
3. Raju, K., Prestressed Concrete Bridges, CBS  
 
Subject Code: CE4L042  Name: Advanced Foundation 
Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 
3 
Prerequisite: None  
Bearing capacity of shallow foundations: Prandtl, Terzaghi and Meyerhof s method of 
analysis, safe and allowable bearing pressures, selection of type and depth of foundations, 
combined footings, mat foundations including floating raft, settlement calculations, 
Skempton - Bjerrum modification, and Martin s method, bearing capacity of layered soils, 
bearing capacity of  footings on slopes, Deep foundations: mechanics of load transfer in 
piles, load carrying capacity, pile load test, lateral loaded piles, design of pile groups 
including settlement calculations, design of block foundation, well foundations, coffer 
dams, pi er foundations, earth pressure computations on retaining walls and their design, 
earthquake response of foundations.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Das, B. M., Principles of Foundation Engineering, Cengage Learning.  
2. Budhu, M., Soil Mechanics and Foundations, Wiley Publishers, New Delhi.  
3. Coduto, D. P., Foundation Design: Principles and Practices, Prentice Hill Publishers.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
66 
 4. Holts, R. D. and Kovacs, W. D., An Introduction to Geotechnical Engineering, Prentice 
Hall. 
5. Das, B. M., Shallow Foundations: Bearing Capacity and S ettlement, CRC Press.  
6. Tomilson, M. J., Foundation Design and Construction, Pearson Publishers.  
   
Subject Code: CE4L043  Name: Numerical Methods in 
Geotechnical Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 
3 
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction to numerical modeling in Geotechnical Engineering, constitutive modeling, 
review of  basic concepts, solution of nonlinear systems of equations, finite difference 
method, finite element method, constitutive modeling of soil response, large deformation – 
large strain analysis, appl ications: flow and consolidation, groundwater and seepage, 
slopes and cuts, embankments, shallow and deep foundations, retaining walls, tunnels and 
caverns and rock Mechanics  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Desai, C. S. and Christian, J. T., Numerical Methods in Geotechnical Engineering, 
McGraw -Hill Publishers.  
2. Potts, D. M. and Zdravkovic, L., Finite Element Analysis in Geotechnical Engineering: 
Theory and Application, Thomas Telford Publishing.  
3. Benz, T. and  Nordal, S., Numerical Methods in Geotechnical Engineering: NUMGE 2010, 
CRC Press.  
4. Christian, J. T., Numerical Methods in Geotechnical Engineering, McGraw -Hill 
Publishers.  
 
Subject Code: CE4L044  Name: Soil Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 
3 
Prerequisite: None  
Shear strength of cohesionless and cohesive soils, physico -chemical aspects, experimental 
determination of shear strength, failure theories, Yield criteria, influence on failure 
conditions of inter -mediate principal stress, history, drai nage, rate of stress applications 
etc.; Plastic equilibrium in soils, Mohr diagram, active and passive states, theories of earth 
pressure on retaining walls, effect of wall friction on the shape of sliding surface, theories 
of arching, bearing capacity, co ncepts of general and local shear failure, critical height of 
vertical banks, various methods of computation of slope stability, earth pressure on 
timbering of cuts and on free and anchored bulkheads.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Lambe, T. W. and Whitman, R. V.,  Soil Mechanics in SI Version, Wiley, New Delhi.  
2. Scott, R. F., Principles of Soil Mechanics, Addison Wesley, World Student Edition.  
3. Leonards, G. A., Foundation Engineering, McGraw -Hill.  
4. Bowles, J. E., Foundations Analysis and Design, McGraw -Hill.  
5. Peck, R. B., Hanson, W. E., and Thornburn, T. H., Foundation Engineering, John Wiley 
and Sons.  
 
Subject Code: CE4L045  Name: Earth Retaining Structures  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 
3 
Prerequisite: None  
Earth Pressure: Fundamental relationships between the lateral pressures and the strain 
with a back fill. Rankine’s and Coulomb’s theories, Active, passive and earth pressure at -
rest; Backfill with broken surface, wall with broken back, concentrated surchar ge above the 
back fill, earth pressure due to uniform surcharge, earth pressure of stratified backfills, 
saturated and partially saturated backfill. Passive earth pressure in engineering practice. 
Assumption and conditions, point of application of passive earth pressures; Bulkheads: 
Definition and assumptions, conditions of end supports and distribution of active earth 
pressure and bulkheads, bulkheads with free and fixed earth supports, equivalent beam Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
67 
 method, Improvements suggested by Rowe, Tschebotarioff ’s method, Anchorage of 
bulkheads and resistance of anchor walls, spacing between bulkheads and anchor walls, 
resistance of anchor plates, Consideration of effects of ground water, seepage, surcharge 
loading together with possibility of shallow and deep sl iding failures on retaining structure; 
Sheet Pile wall: Free earth system, fixed earth system, Dead man; Tunnel and Conduit: 
Stress distribution around tunnels, Types of conduits, Load on projecting conduits; Arching 
and Open Cuts: Arching in soils, Braced  excavations, Earth pressure against bracings in 
cuts, Heave of the bottom of cut in soft clays; Reinforced earth retaining structures -Design 
of earth embankments and slopes; Recent advances in Earth retaining structures.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Das, B. M.,  Principles of Foundation Engineering, Thomson, Indian Edition.  
2. Clayton, C. R. I., Milititsky, J. and Woods, R. I., Earth Pressure and Earth -retaining 
Structures, Chapman and Hall Publishers.  
3. Bowel, J., Foundation Engineering, Analysis and Design, McGraw H ill. 
4. Raj, P., Geotechnical Engineering, Tata McGraw Hill.  
5. Craig, R. F., Soil Mechanics, Chapman and Hall (ELBS).  
 
Subject Code: CE4L053  Name: Open Channel Hydraulics  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 
3 
Prerequisite: None  
Basic concepts; Energy and Momentum equations and their applications; Critical flow, 
channel control ad transitions; Uniform flow and flow resistance; Sheet flow; Concepts of 
boundary layer and surface roughness; Theoretical uniform flow equations; Instability of 
uniform flow; Gradually varied flow , flow profile classification and computation methods; 
Flow profiles in natural channels; Spatially varied flow; Hydraulic jump; Unsteady flow, 
continuity equation, dynamic equation, wave propagation; Method of characteristics; 
Rapidly varied unsteady flow, s urges; Dam break problems.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Subramanya, K., Flow in Open Channels, Tata McGraw -Hill.  
2. Chanson, H., Hydraulics of Open Channel Flow, Elsevier.  
3. Chow, V. T., Open Channel Hydraulics, McGraw Hill.  
4. French, R., Open Channel Hydraulics, McGraw -Hill. 
5. Sturm, T.W., Open Chann el Hydraulics, Tata McGraw -Hill 
 
Subject Code: CE4L054  Name: Water Resources Systems  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 
3 
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction to systems concept in water resources engineering: its role in planning and 
management; data acquisition and processing; descriptive and prescriptive models; 
economics of water resources systems; social, economical, technical and environmental 
issues; decision making under uncertainty and/or risk; evaluation of project alternative s; 
application to surface and subsurface water resources systems planning and management.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Vedula, S. and Mujumdar, P. P., Water Resources Systems, McGraw -Hill.  
2. Jain, S. K., and Singh, V. P., Water Resources Systems Planning and Management, 
Elsevier.  
3. Purcell, P., Design of Water Resources Systems, Thomas Telford Publishing.  
 
Subject Code: CE4L055  Name: Design of Hydraulic 
Structures  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 
3 
Prerequisite: None  
Concrete dams, force and stress analysis for components like piers, bridges and trash rack Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
68 
 and their reinforcement detailing; stress analysis around galleries, adits and shafts and 
reinforcement provisions; integrated stability analysis of concrete dams co nsidering 
foundation rock; construction methods for concrete dams. Embankment dams, seepage 
analysis (finding the phreatic line) for different types of embankment dams; seepage 
control measures for embankment dams; construction methods for embankment dams.  
Spillways and energy dissipators design of ogee spillways; calculations for chute spillway 
profiles; flow characteristics of shaft and syphon spillways; types of energy dissipators, 
their selection and dimensioning; flow characteristics of radial gates; i ntroduction to 
relevant BIS codes and guidelines. Barrages - design of barrage structure and canal head 
regulator; construction methods for barrages. Irrigation structures, Canals, cross drainage 
works, falls and energy dissipators.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Garg, S. K., Irrigation Engineering and Hydraulic Structures, Khanna Publishers.  
2. Ghosh, K., Analysis and Design Practice of Hydraulic Concrete Structures, PHI Learning 
Private Limited.  
3. Novak, P., Moffat, A. I. B., Nalluri, C., and Narayanan, R. Hydraulic Structures, Taylor & 
Fransis.  
 
 
Subject Code: CE4L062  Name: Pavement Design  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 
3 
Prerequisite: None  
Types of Pavement, Pavement Composition, Philosophy of design of flexible and rigid 
pavements, analysis of pavements using different analytical methods, selection of 
pavement design input parameters, traffic loading and volume, material characterization, 
drainage, failure criteria, reliability, design of flexible and rigid pavements using different 
methods, pavement evaluation and overl ay design.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Huang, Y. H., Pavement Analysis and Design, Pearson Education.  
2. Yoder, E. J. and Witczak, M. W., Principles of Pavement Design, John Wiley & Sons Ltd.  
3. Mallick, R. B. and El -Korchi, T., Pavement Engineering: Principles and Practice, CRC 
Press.  
 
 
 
 
Subject Code:  
CE6L304  Name: Advanced Concrete Technology  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit:3  
Prerequisite: None  
Fundamental of concrete - constituents, proportioning, mixing, transportation, placing and 
curing., Properties of fresh and hardened concrete., Quality control in concrete 
construction, Concrete mix design, Durability of concrete - alkali aggregate reaction, 
reinforcement corrosion, freezing and thawing, etc., Special concretes - high strength, low 
heat of hydration, high early  strength, self -compacting, etc., Construction methods – shot-
crete, roller compacted concrete, etc., Reinforcing materials - epoxy coated bars, fibre -
reinforced plastics, Introduction to 'maintenance' of concrete structures - use of non -
destructive testin g, evaluation criteria.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Gambhir, M,L., Concrete Technology, Tata Mcgraw Hill  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
69 
 2. Neville, A.M. and Brooks, J.J., Concrete Technology, Neville, ELBS/Longman  
3. Neville, A.M., Properties of Concrete, ELBS/Longman  
4. Ghose, D.N., Construction Materials, Tata Mcgraw Hill  
5. Mehta, P.K. and Montiero, P.M.J., Concrete Material, Microstructure and Properties, Tata 
Mcgraw Hill  
 
 
Subject Code:  
CE6L305  Name: Theory of Plates & Shells  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4 
Prerequisite: None  
Pure bending of plates; Symmetric bending of circular plates; Small deflection of laterally 
loaded plates; Rectangular plates with various edge conditions; Continuous rectangular 
plates; Plates of various shapes; Shells as space enclosure, geometry, classification, 
principal and Gauss curvature; General theory of thin elastic shells; Shallow and high rise 
shells; Circular long and short cylindrical shells, beam -arch approximation for long shells; 
Shells of double curvature, surfaces of revolution and translation; Circular, ellipti c and 
hyperbolic paraboloids, conoids and funicular shells - membrane and approximate bending 
theories; Closed form and numerical methods of analysis of synclastic and anticlastic shells.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Timoshenko, S.L., Theory of Plates and Shells,  McGraw Hill  
2. Reddy, J.N., Theory and Analysis of Elastic Plates and Shells, Taylor & Francis  
3. Ugural, A.C., Stresses in plates and shells, WCB/McGraw Hill  
4. Ventsel , E. and Krauthammer , T., Thin Plates and Shells: Theory: Analysis, and 
Applications, CRC Press   
 
Subject Code:  
CE6L306  Name: Seismic Design of Structures  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4 
Prerequisite: None  
Characteristics of earthquakes; Earthquake response of structures; Concept of earthquake 
resistant design; Response of SDOF and MDOF systems to random excitations. Code 
provisions of design of buildings; Design for Liquefaction; Non -engineered construction; 
Special topics: bridges, dams, strengthening of existing buildings.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Duggal, S.K., Earthquake Resistant Design of Structures, Oxford University Press  
2. Chopra, A.K., Dynamics of Structures: Theory and Applications to Earthquake 
Engineering, Prentice Hall/Pearson Education  
3. Paulay, T. and Priestley, M.J.N., Seismic Design of Reinforced Concrete and Masonry 
Buildings, Wiley International Publication  
4. Bolt, B.A., Earthquakes, W.H. Freeman  
5. Kramer, S.L., Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering, Pearson  
 
Subject Code:  
CE6L307  Name: Bridge Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3 
Pre-requisite(s): None  
Introduction , historical review, engineering and aesthetic requirements in bridge design, 
introduction to bridge codes of practice, economic evaluation of bridge projects, site 
investigation and planning, hydraulic calculations for bridges, bridge foundations -open, 
pile, well and caisson, Piers, abutments and approach structures, superstructures -analysis 
and design of right, skew and curved slabs, Girder bridges -Types, load distribution, design, 
orthotropic plate analysis of bridge decks, introduction to long span brid ges- cantilever, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
70 
 arch, cable stayed and suspension bridges.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Victor , D.J., Essentials of bridge engineering, Oxford & IBH Publishing  
2. Ponnuswamy , S., Bridge Engineering, Tata Mcgraw Hill  
3. Jagadeesh, T.R.  and Jayaram, M.A., Design of Bridge Structures, Phi Learning  
4. Bindra, S.P., Principles and Practice of Bridge Engineering, Dhanpat Rai Publications  
 
Subject Code:  
CE6L308  Name: Infrastructure Maintenance and 
Rehabilitation  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3 
Pre-requisite(s): None  
Quality assurance for concrete construction as built concrete properties strength, 
permeability, thermal properties and cracking. Influence on servicebility and durability: –
Effects due to climate, temperature, chemicals, wear and erosion, Design and construction 
errors, corrosion mechanism, Effects of cover thickness and cracking, method s of corrosion 
protection, corrosion inhibitors, corrosion resistant steels, coatings, cathodic protection; 
Maintenance and repair strategies: – Definitions: Maintenance, repair and rehabilitation, 
Facets of Maintenance importance of Maintenance, Preventive  measures on various aspects 
Inspection, Assessment procedure for evaluating a damaged structure, causes of 
deterioration , testing techniques; Materials: -Materials for Repair – Special Mortar and 
Concretes, Concrete Chemicals, Special Cements and High Gra de Concrete, Expansive 
Cement, Polymer Concrete, Sulphur Infiltrated Concrete, Ferro Cement, Fiber Reinforced 
Concrete, and Admixtures of latest origin. Techniques for Repair - Surface Repair – Material 
Selection – Surface Preparation - Rust Eliminators and  Polymers Coating For Rebar During 
Repair – Repair Of Cracks In Concrete and Masonry -Methods of Repair - Epoxy Injection, 
Mortar Repair For Cracks - Guniting and Shotcreting - Waterproofing Of Concrete Roofs; 
Strengthening Measures - Flexural Strengthening , Beam Shear Capacity Strengthening, 
Column Strengthening, Shoring, Under Pinning and Jacketing. Demolition of Buildings – 
Introduction, Planning, Precautions and protective measures in demolition work, Sequence 
of operations, demolition of structural elem ents. 
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Campbell -Allen, D. and Roper, H., Concrete Structures, Materials, Maintenance and 
Repair, Longman Scientific and Technical, UK  
2. Allen, R.T and Edwards, S.C, Repair of Concrete Structures, Blakie and Sons, UK  
3. Santhakumar A.R., Con crete Technology, Oxford University Press  
4. Dayaratnam, P. and Rao, R., Maintenance and Durability of Concrete Structures, 
University Press, India  
5. CPWD, Handbook on Repairs and Rehabilitation of RCC Buildings.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L309  Name: Modern Construction Materials  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Basics (Introduction to the course, Science, Engineering and Technology of Materials); 
Microstructure (Atomic Bonding, Structure of solids, Movement of atoms, Development of 
microstructure); Material behaviour (Surface properties, Response to stress, Failu re 
theories, Fracture mechanics, Rheology, Thermal properties); Structural Materials (Review 
of Construction Materials and Criteria for Selection, Wood and Wood Products, Polymers, 
Fibre Reinforced Polymers, Metals, Bituminous Materials, Concrete, Glass); : Non -structural 
materials, accessories and finishes (Review of Non -structural Materials and Criteria for 
Selection, Waterproofing materials, Polymer Floor Finishes, Paints, Tiles, Acoustic Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
71 
 Treatment, Dry walls, Anchors); Environmental Concerns, Social Per ception of Construction 
Materials.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Varghese, P.C., Building Materials, Prentice -Hall India  
2. Callister, W.D., Materials Science and Engineering: An introduction, John Wiley  
3. Raghavan, V., Materials Science and Engineering, Prentice Hall  
4. Higgins, R.A., Properties of Engineering Materials, Industrial Press  
5. Construction materials: Their nature and behaviour, Eds. J.M. Illston and P.L.J. 
Domone, Spon Press  
6. Young, J.F., Mindess, S., Gray, R.J. and Bentur, A., The Science and Technology of Civil 
Engineering Materials, Prentice Hall  
7. Neville, A.M., Properties of concrete, Pearson  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L310  Name: Advanced construction Techniques  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Sub Structure Construction -Box jacking, Pipe Jacking, Under Water Construction of 
diaphragm walls and Basement, Tunnelling Techniques, Piling Techniques, Driving Well and 
Caisson Sinking, Cofferdam, Cable Anchoring and Grouting, Driving Diaphragm Walls, 
Sheet Piles -Laying Operations For Built Up Offshore System -Shoring For Deep Cutting -
Large Reservoir Construction with membranes and Earth system -well points -Dewatering 
and stand by Plant equipment for underground open excavation ; Super Structure 
Constructi on- Vacuum dewatering of concrete flooring -Concrete paving technology, 
Techniques of construction for continuous concreting operation in Tall buildings of various 
shapes and Varying sections, Launching Techniques -Suspended formwork -erection 
techniques of t all structures, Large span structures -Launching techniques for heavy decks - 
in-situ pre -stressing in high rise structures, aerial transporting ,handling, erecting light 
weight components on tall structures -erection of lattice towers and rigging of transmis sion 
line structures; Construction Sequences - in cooling towers, Silos Chimney, Sky scrapers, 
bow string bridges, cable stayed bridges; Launching and pushing of box decks, support 
structure for heavy Equipment and conveyor and machinery in heavy industries , erection of 
articulated structures, braced domes and space decks;  
Repair Construction: Mud Jacking Grout through Slab Foundation, Micro Piling for 
Strengthening Floor and Shallow Profile, Pipeline Laying, Protecting Sheet Piles, Sub Grade 
Water Proofing , Underpinning Advanced Techniques and Sequence in Demolition and 
Dismantling.  
Text/ Reference  Books : 
1. Brown, R., Practical foundation engineering hand book, McGraw Hill Publications  
2. Powers , J.P., Corwin , A.B., Schmall , P.C. and  Kaeck, W.E., Construction Dewatering: 
New Methods and Applications, John Wiley and Sons  
3. Irvine, J., Advanced Construction Techniques, California Rocketry  
4. National Building Code of India, Part -IV and VII – 2006 
5. Mohan, R. and Jaisingh. M.P.,  Advances in Building Materials and Construction, CBRI 
Roorkee  
6. Hand Book on concrete Mixes based on Indian standards, SP -23 (S&T)  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L311  Name: Construction Project Management  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Principles of Project Management, Project Planning, Introduction to scheduling -
work/project break down structures, Bar -charts; Principles of application of CPM and PERT; Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
72 
 Precedence Method; Updating; Time - cost trade -offs, Resource constrained scheduling; 
Resource leveling Project control; Performance Measurement, Earned value; Multiple 
Construction Projects; Other network techniques; Project Management Software Packages.  
Text/ Reference  Books : 
1. Jha, N.K., Construction Project Management, Pearson Education India  
2. Williams, T., Construction Management, Pearson Education India  
3. Chitkara, K., Construction Project Management Techniques And Practice, Tata McGraw 
Hill 
4. Purifoy, R., Schexnayder , C.J.,  Shapira , A. and  Schmitt , R., Construction Planning, 
equipment and Methods, McGraw Hill, Tokyo, Japan  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L312  Name: Advanced Design of RC Structure  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Prerequisite: None  
Design of overhead, underground, ground supported water tanks, dams;  Design of 
industrial structures; Design of bunkers and silos, Airy’s theory, Janssen’s theory; Design 
of special RC elements: Design of slender columns, RC walls, ordinary and shear wall s, 
Corbels, Deep beams, RCC chimney; Introduction to shell and folded plate roofs, their 
forms and structural behaviour. Design of simple cylindrical shell roof by beam theory, 
Yield line analysis of slabs by virtual work, Yield line analysis by equilibriu m methods.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Varghese  , P.C., Advanced Reinforced Concrete Design, PHI Learning  
2. Naeim, F., Handbook on Seismic Analysis and Design of Structure s, Kluwer Academic 
Publisher  
3. IS 4326, Earthquake Resistant Design and Construction of Buildings - Code of Practice, 
Bureau of Indian Standard; New Delhi  
4. Jain, S.K. and Jaiswal, O.R., Guidelines for Seismic Design of Liquid Storage Tanks, 
NICEE, IIT Kanpur  
5. Fintel, M., Handbook of Concrete Engineering, CBS Publishers Delhi  
 
Subject Code: 
MA6L001  Name : Mathematical Methods  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Prerequisite: None  
Probability and Statistics : Random variables (rv) and their properties, some standard  
discrete and continuous rv, Expectation, Variance, moments, moment generating functions, 
functions of a rv, their distribution and moments, joint, marginal and conditional 
distribution and independence of rvs, Hypothesis testing.  
Numerical solutions of sy stems of linear equations: Gauss elimination, LU decomposition, 
Gauss -Jacobi and Gauss -Seidel methods.  
Numerical methods of ODE and PDE: Runge -Kutta and finite difference methods for ODE, 
Finite difference methods for solving 2 -D Laplace’s equation, Poisso n’s equation, 1 -D heat 
equation : Bender Schmidt, Crank Nicholson method and Du Fort Frankel methods, 1 -D 
wave equation using Explicit method. Consistency and stability analysis.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Grawel, B.S. Numerical Methods  
2. Jain, M.K., Iyengar, S.R .K. and Jain, R.K. Numerical Methods -problem and solutions, 
Wiley Eastern Limited, 2001.  
3. Ross, S. Introduction to Probability Models, Wiley India  
4. Gun, A.M., Gupta, M.K. and Gupta, B.S. Fundamentals of Statistics  
5. Hayter, A.J., Probability and Statistics, Duxbury, 2002  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
73 
 6. Scarborough, J.B., Numerical mathematical analysis, Oxford & IBH Publishing 
Co.Pvt.,2000  
7. Hamming, R.W., Numerical Methods for Scientist and Engineers, McGraw Hill, 1998  
8. Mathews, J.H. and Fink, K.D. Numerical Methods using MATLAB, Pearson Educ ation, 
2004.  
 
Subject Code: 
MA6L002  Name: Advanced Techniques in  
Operation Research  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Prerequisite: None  
One variable unconstrained optimization, multivariable unconstrained optimisation, Karush -
Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions for constrained optimization, quadratic programming, 
separable programming, convex and non convex programming, steepest and Quasi -Newton 
method.  
Dynamic Programming: Characteristics of dynamic problems, deterministic dynamic 
programming and probabilitistic dyn amic programming, Network analysis, Shortest path  
problems, minimum spanning tree problem, maximum flow problem, minimum cost flow 
problem, network simplex, interior point methods, stochastic programming, Nonlinear goal 
programming applications, Geometric Programming.  
Multi-objective Optimization Problems: Linear and non linear programming problems,  
Weighting and Epsilon method, P -norm methods, Gradient Projection Method, STEM 
method, Convex Optimization.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Rao, S.S., Engineering Optimiz ation Theory and Practices, John Wiley and Sons, 2009  
2. Ehrgott, M. Multi -criteria Optimization, Springer 2006  
3. Miettien, K.M, Non -linear multi -objective optimization, Kluwers International Series, 
2004 
4. Deb, K., Multi -Objective Optimization using Evolutionary  Algorithms, John Wiley & 
Sons, 2001.  
 
 
 
 
Subject Code: 
MA7L020  Subject  Name:   Nonlinear Functional 
Analysis  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Prerequisite: Mathematics – II (MA1L002)  
Fixed point theory, Banach contraction mapping theorem, contractive type mappings, 
generalization of Banach contraction mapping theorem, fixed point theorem of other types. 
Nonlinear operators, monotone, strictly monotone and strongly monotone operators, their 
propert ies and applications. Variational inequalities and complementarity problem. 
Approximation theory, theory of best approximation and farthest points. Calculus of Banach 
Space, Frechet and Gateaux differentiability, strict convexity and uniform convexity of 
norms, semi inner product space.  
Text Books: :  
1. Zeidler E. Nonlinear Functional Analysis and its applications, Springer  
2. Ambrosetti A., Arcoya D., Birkhauser. An Introduction to Nonlinear Functional Analysis 
and Elleptic Problems,  
References Books: :  
1. Debnath L. and Mikusinski P., Hilbert Spaces with Applications, Academic Press  
2. Kinderleherer D., Stampacchia G. An Introduction to Variational Inequalities and their Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
74 
 Applications, Academic Press  
3. Tinsley Oden   J., Demkowicz L. Applied Functional Analysis, CRC Press  
 
 
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L008  Subject Name: Hydraulics of Sediment 
Transport  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite : None  
Sediment properties; Initiation of motion; Bed Load; Bed Forms; Effective bed roughness; 
Armouring; Suspended Load; Total Load; Transport of Sediment due to unsteady flow; 
Meandering of rivers; Braided river; Local scour at different structures; Sediment sampling; 
Mathematical models of sediment transport.  
Text/ Reference  Books : 
1. Yang, Sediment Transport: Theory and Practice  
2. Graf, Hydraulics of Sediment Transport  
3. Fredsoe and Diegaard, Mechanics of Coastal Sediment Transport  
4. Garde, History of Fluvial Hydraulics  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L017  Subject Name: Advanced Transportation 
Systems Analysis  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite : None  
Behavioural aspect of transportation planning: Basics of travel behaviour analysis, stated 
and revealed preference data, binary logit, multinomial logit, nested logit model, maximum 
likelihood technique, travel behaviour survey, case study analysis/discuss ion on travel 
behaviour analysis - destination choice, mode choice, route choice etc.  demand -supply 
interaction in an urban transport system, urban transportation network analysis, shortest 
path analysis, formulation of traffic assignment problem, solving traffic assignment 
problems, equilibrium traffic assignment with link interactions, traffic assignment under 
travel behaviour, Basics of dynamic traffic assignment  
Text/ Reference  Books:  
1. Marvin L. Manheim, Fundamentals Of Transportation Systems Analysis, Volume 1  
2. Swait, Louviere and Hensher, Stated Preference Methods  
3. Moshe Ben Akiva, Discrete Choice Analysis: Theory and Analysis to Travel Demand  
4. YosefSheffi, Urban Transportation Networks  
5. Transportation Systems Engineering: Theory and Methods by Ennio Casce tta 
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L018  Subject Name: Analysis and Design of 
Pavements  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite : None  
Types of Pavements, Pavement Composition, Philosophy of design of flexible and rigid 
pavements, analysis of pavements using different analytical methods, selection of 
pavement design input parameters, traffic loading and volume, material characterization, 
drainage, failure criteria, reliability, design of flexible and rigid pavements using different 
methods, comparison of different pavem ent design approaches, design of overlays and 
drainage system.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Y. H. Huang, Pavement Analysis and Design  
2. E.J. Yoder and M. W. Witczak, Principles of Pavement Design  
3. Rajib B. Mallick, Tahar El -Korchi, Pavement Engineering: Principles a nd Practice  
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
75 
 *The examination for this course may be considered for open book system.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L019  Subject Name: Pavement Evaluation, 
Maintenance and Rehabilitation  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite : None  
Types of pavements, Distresses in flexible and rigid pavements , Techniques for functional 
and structural evaluation of pavements, pavement rehabilitation techniques, overlay design 
procedures, recycling of flexible and rigid pavements, Maintenance of paved and unpaved 
roads, Pavement mana gement systems  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Y. H. Huang, Pavement Analysis and Design  
2. Rajib B. Mallick, Tahar El -Korchi, Pavement Engineering: Principles and Practice  
3. Derek Pearson, Deterioration and Maintenance of Pavements  
4. Ralph Haas, W. Ronald Hudson, John P. Zaniewski, Modern pavement management  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L020  Subject Name: Dynamics of Soil and 
Foundations  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite : None  
Introduction, vibration theories, analysis of free and forced   vibrations using spring dashpot 
model, single degree of freedom system, multi -degrees of freedom system, application of 
single and multi -degree of freedom systems, wave propagation in elastic m edia, laboratory 
and field evaluation of dynamic soil properties, seismic bearing capacity of shallow 
foundations, pile foundation under dynamic load, seismic earth pressures, seismic slope 
stability.  
Text/ Reference  Books : 
1. Swami Saran, Soil Dynamics and Machine Foundations, Galgotia Publications.  
2. Braja M. Das and G. V. Ramana, Principles of Soil Dynamics, Publisher: CL -Engineering.  
3. Richart, F.E., Woods, R.D., and Hall, J.R., Vibrations of soils and foundations, Prentice 
Hall, 1970.  
4. Steven L. Kramer, Geote chnical Earthquake Engineering, 1996, Prentice Hall.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L021  Subject Name: Soil -Structure Interaction  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite : None  
Introduction to soil foundation interaction problems, soil behaviour, foundation behaviour, 
interface behaviour, concept of subgrade modulus, effects/parameters influencing subgrade 
modulus soil foundation interaction analysis, Winkler, elastic continuum, two parameter 
elastic model, Elastic Plastic behaviour, time dependent behaviour, elastic an alysis of single 
pile, theoretical solutions for settlement and load distributions, analysis of pile group, 
interaction analysis, Load deflection prediction for laterally loaded piles, other applications.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Selvadurai, A.P.S.,"Elastic a nalysis of soil foundation interaction. Elsevier Science Ltd.  
2. Plasticity and Geomechanics by R. O. Davis, A. P. S. Selvadurai, Cambridge University 
Press  
3. R.O. Davis and A.P.S. Selvadurai, Elasticity and Geomechanics, Cambridge University 
Press, New York.  
4. Poulos, H.G. and Davis E.H. Pile Foundation Analysis and Design.  
5. Soil structure interaction: numerical analysis and modelling / edited by John W. Bull. 
London ; New York : E & FN Spon, 1994.  
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
76 
 Subject Code: 
CE6L022  Subject Name: Ground Improvement  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite : None  
Introduction, ground improvements schemes for cohesive soil sites (preloading, staged 
construction, accelerated consolidation with prefabricated drains, granular columns, lime 
columns, electro -osmosis, compaction piles, deep mixing, and vibro -replacement), ground 
improvement schemes for cohesionless soil sites (deep dynamic compaction, vibro -
compaction, blast densification, grouting, and jet grouting), mechanically stabilized 
earthwork, soil nailing, ground anchors, light  weight fill, and monitoring and quality control 
in ground improvement projects.  
Text/ Reference  Books : 
1. P. Puroshothama Raju, Ground Improvement Techniques, Laxmi Publications, New 
Delhi.  
2. M.P. Moseley and K. Kirsch, Ground Improvement, Spon Press, Taylor and Francis 
Group.  
3. B. M. Das, Principles of Foundation Engineering, Cengage Learning.  
4. Buddhima Indraratna and Jian J Chu, Ground Improvement: Case Histories, Elsevier.  
5. Chris A. Raison, Gro und and Soil Improvement, Thomas telford, UK.  
6. Robert M. Koerner., Designing with Geosynthetics, Pearson Prentice Hall.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L023  Subject Name: Computational 
Geomechanics  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite : None  
Numerical modeling, constitutive modeling of soils and rock, continuum and discrete 
element modeling. Concept of stress and strain, principle stresses and strains.  Octahedral 
stresses and strains, finite element discretization of a continuum, geomechanics problems 
of plane s train and axisymmetric problem.  Failure criteria for soils, associated and non -
associated flow rule. Finite elements for non -linear material problems in soil mechanics 
computational procedures. Finite difference approach. Simulation of soil -structure 
interaction problems, application in consolidation, bearing capacity and slope stability 
problems using numerical approaches.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Chandrakant S. Desai and J.T. Christian Numerical Methods in Geotechnical 
Engineering, McGraw -Hill Publishers.  
2. Plasticity and Geomechanics by R. O. Davis, A. P. S. Selvadurai, Cambridge University 
Press  
3. Finite Element Analysis in Geotechnical Engineering: Theory and Application Author: 
David M. Potts and Lidija Zdravkovic (January 1, 2001)  
4. John T. Christian, Numeri cal Methods in Geotechnical Engineering, McGraw -Hill 
Publishers  
5. Computational Geomechanics with Special Reference to Earthquake Engineering by O. 
C. Zienkiewicz, A. H. C. Chan, M. Pastor, and B. A. Schrefler (Hardcover - May 11, 
1999), Publisher: Wiley  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L024  Subject Name: Geotechnical Earthquake 
Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite : None  
Introduction, engineering seismology, plate tectonics, earthquake magnitude, ground 
motion characteristics, effect of local soil conditions on ground motion, dynamic behaviour 
of soils, analysis of seismic site response. Liquefaction analysis of soil, labo ratory and in -
situ testing for seismic loading, analysis and design of slopes, embankments, foundations Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
77 
 and earth retaining structures for seismic loading, computer -aided analysis.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Kramer, S.L., Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering, Pearson Education.  
2. Day, R.W., Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering Handbook, McGraw Hill.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L025  Subject Name: Geotechnical Risk and 
Reliability  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite : None  
Introduction to probabilistic geotechnical engineering, variability measures, random 
variables, probability mass and density functions, moments of distribution, modelling of 
uncertainty, engineering judgment, spatial variability of soil, autocovariance functions, 
functions of random fields, levels of reliability, loads and resistances, reliability methods, 
first order second moment (FOSM) method, Hasofer -Lind approach, Response Surface 
Method, Monte Carlo simulations.  
Text/Reference Books : 
1. Achintya Haldar and Sankaran Mahadevan, Probability, Reliabi lity, and Statistical 
Methods in Engineering Design, John Wiley and Sons  
2. Gregory Baecher and John Christian, Reliability and Statistics in Geotechnical 
Engineering, John Wiely and Sons, Inc.  
3. Alfredo Hua -Sing Ang and Wilson H. Tang, Probability Concepts in Engineering Planning 
and Design: Basic Principles (Vol. I), John Wiely and Sons, Inc.  
4. Alfredo Hua -Sing Ang and Wilson H. Tang, Probability Concepts in Engineering Planning 
and Design: Decision, Risk, and Reliability (Vol. II), John Wiely and Sons, Inc.  
5. Alfredo Hua -sing Ang, Wilson H. Tang, Probability Concepts In Engineering: Emphasis 
On Applications In Civil & Environmental Engineering, Publisher: Wiley  
6. Robert E. Melchers, Structural Reliability Analysis and Prediction, John Wiley and Sons.  
7. Andrzej S Nowak  and Kevin R. Collins, Reliability of Structures  
8. Erik Vanmarcke, Random Fields: Analysis and Synthesis, The MIT Press, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L026  Subject Name: Advanced Soil Mechanics  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite : None  
Introduction: Origin of soil and its types, mineralogy and structure of clay minerals, 
Consolidation: Steady State flow, 2D and 3D seepage, transient flow; Compressibility and 
rate of consolidation, one, two, and three dimensional consolidation theories; S and drains; 
Mohr’s circles; Critical state soil mechanics: Critical State Line, Hvorslev Surface, Yield 
Surfaces: Modified Cam -clay and Original Cam -clay; Elastic and plastic analysis of soil: 
Constitutive relationships of soil; failure theories. Limit ana lysis-Upper bound theorems, 
lower bound theorems, limit equilibrium methods; Soil Stabilization: Classification of 
stabilizing agents and stabilization processes. Strength improvement characteristic of soft 
and sensitive clays, Marine clay and waste materi al. 
Text/Reference Books : 
1. B M Das, Advanced Soil Mechanics, Taylor and Francis  
2. R F Scott, Principles of Soil Mechanics, Addison & Wesley.  
3. R.O. Davis and A.P.S. Selvadurai, Elasticity and Geomechanics, Cambridge University 
Press, New York.  
4. Mitchell, James K, Fundamentals of Soil Behaviour, John Wiley and Sons.  
5. D.M. Wood, Soil Behaviour and Critical State Soil Mechanics, University of Glasgow.  
6. Schofield, A. N.; Wroth, C. P., Critical State Soil Mechanics, McGraw -Hill 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
78 
 Subject Code: 
CE6L027  Subject Name: Free Surface Flows  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite : None  
Energy and momentum of flow; critical flow; channel control and transitions; discharge 
measurement methods; uniform flow and flow resistance; composite roughness and 
compound channels; gradually varied flow; classifications and computations of free surface  
profiles; spatially varied flow; supercritical flows and oblique flows; rapidly varied flow; 
hydraulic jump; continuity and dynamic equations of unsteady flow; wave propagation and 
surge; method of characteristics; dam -break problem; flow in channel bends ; buoyant and 
submerged jets.  
Text/ Reference  Books : 
1. K. Subramanya, Flow in open channels  
2. Hubert Chanson, Hydraulics of Open Channel Flow  
3. V. T. Chow, Open Channel Hydraulics  
4. Richard French, Open Channel Hydraulics  
5. Sturm, Open Channel Hydraulics  
 
Subject Code: 
ME6L052  Subject Name: Applied Elasticity  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Prerequisite : None  
Concepts of states of stress and strain. Analysis of three dimensional stresses and strains, 
equations of equilibrium, generalized Hookes law, Plane elastic p roblems in cartesian and 
polar coordinates, axisymmetric problems, torsion, solutions of problems using elasticity 
theory, anisotropic elasticity, thermoelasticity, contact problems, energy and variational 
principles and elastic stability.  
Text/ Reference  Books:  
1. Y. C. Fung, "Foundations of Solid Mechanics", Prentice - Hall Publishers.  
2. T.G. Sitharam and L.GovindaRaju, "Applied Elasticity", Interline Publishers, Bangalore.  
3. S.P.Timoshenko and J.N. Goodier, "Theory of Elasticity", McGraw -Hill Book Com pany.  
4. C.T. Wang, "Applied Elasticity", McGraw -Hill Book Company  
5. Elasticity in engineering mechanics - Arthur Peter Boresi, Ken Pin Chong (W iley) 
 
Subject Code: 
CE6L029  Subject Name: Structural Health Monitoring  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite : None  
Introduction to structural health monitoring and overview of different techniques. Vibration 
based damage detection techniques. Sensors for structural health monitoring. Non -
destructive techniques (NDT). Noncontact measurement. Numerical modelling, an alysis of 
structures and inverse analysis. Linear and Non -Linear systems. Application of  structural 
health monitoring.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Karvari an Ansari, "Structural health monitoring of civil infrastructure", Elsevior.  
2. Adams Douglas E., “Hea lth Monitoring of Structural Materials and Components: Methods 
with Application” John Wiley and Sons Inc.  
3. Ferrar and Worden “Structural Health Monitoring: A Machine Learning Perspective” John 
Wiley and Sons Inc.  
4. Daniel Balageas , Claus -Peter Fritzen , Alfredo Güemes  “Structural Health Monitoring” 
John Wiley and Sons Inc.  
5. Ostachowicz, Wiesław,  Güemes, Alfredo, “New Trends in Structural Health Monitoring” 
Springer  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
79 
 Dual Degree (B.Tech. Civil Engineering and M.Tech. Transportation 
Engineering)  
Curriculum (7th Semester – 10th Semester)  
SEMESTER - VII 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Breadth - 4   3/4 3/4  
Urban Transportation Planning  CE6L401  3-1-0 4 4 81 
Pavement Material Characterization  CE6L403  3-1-0 4 4 81 
Elective - 1  3-0-0 3 3  
CAD Laboratory  CE4P001  0-0-3 2 3 81 
Industrial Training Defence  CE4T001  0-0-0 2 0  
Project – Part 1 (CE)  CE4D001  0-0-0 4 0  
  Total  22/23  17/18   
SEMESTER - VIII  
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Fundamentals of  Traffic Flow Theory  CE6L402  3-1-0 4 4 82 
Elective – 2  3-0-0 3 3  
Elective – 3  3-0-0 3 3  
Elective – 4  3-1-0 4 4  
Traffic Engineering Studies  CE6P402  0-0-3 2 2 82 
Project – Part 2 (CE)  CE4D002  0-0-0 6 0  
  Total  23 17  
SEMESTER - IX 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Elective - 5  3-1-0 4 4  
Pavement Materials Laboratory  CE6P401  0-0-3 2 3 82 
Thesis : Part -I (CE)  CE6D001  0-0-0 12  0  
  Total  18 7  
SEMESTER - X 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Seminar  CE6S002  0-0-0 2 0  
Transportation Systems Planning Studio  CE6P404  0-0-3 2 3 83 
Thesis : Part -I (CE)  CE6D003  0-0-0 12  0  
  Total  16 3  
 Grand Total  Total  220/225    
 
  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
80 
  
Elective -1 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling  CE4L004  3-0-0 3 3 83 
Maintenance and Rehabilitation of 
Concrete Structures  CE4L005  3-0-0 3 3 84 
Bridge Engineering  CE4L022  3-0-0 3 3 84 
Prestressed Concrete  CE4L023  3-0-0 3 3 84 
Soil Engineering  CE4L044  3-0-0 3 3 85 
Earth Retaining Structures  CE4L045  3-0-0 3 3 85 
Remote Sensing and GIS  CE4L051  3-0-0 3 3 85 
NB: Any other subjects of same or higher level floated by any other specialisations of School of 
Infrastructure and/or any other Schools can also be taken as an elective, as suggested by faculty 
advisor/PG Coordinators  
 
Elective -1 to 5  
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Analysis and Design of Pavements  CE6L404  3-1-0 4 4 86 
Design of Transportation Facilities and 
Safety  CE6L451  3-1-0 4 4 86 
Economic Evaluation of Transportation 
System   CE6L452  3-0-0 3 3 87 
Analysis of Transportation Systems  CE6L453  3-0-0 3 3 88 
Pavement Evaluation and Management  CE6L454  3-1-0 4 4 88 
Airport Planning and Design  CE6L455  3-0-0 3 3 88 
Public Transportation System  CE6L456  3-0-0 3 3 89 
Construction Project Management  CE6L006  3-0-0 3 3 89 
Environmental Management & Impact 
Assessment  CE6L011  3-0-0 3 3 89 
Ground Improvement  CE6L022  3-0-0 3 3 90 
Computational Geomechanics  CE6L023  3-0-0 3 3 90 
Geotechnical Risk and Reliability  CE6L025  3-0-0 3 3 91 
Advanced Techniques in Operation 
Research  MA6L002  3-1-0 4 4 91 
NB: Any other subjects of same level floated by any other specialisations of School of Infrastructure 
and/or any other Schools can also be taken as an elective, as suggested by faculty advisor/PG 
Coordinators  
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
81 
 Syllabus  
Subject Code:    
CE 6L401  Subject Name:  Urban Transportation 
Planning  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 04  
 
Pre-requisite(s): None  
Fundamentals of transportation system planning, transportation system planning process, 
Characteristics of Travel and urban transportation system, Demand theory and supply 
theory of transportation system, Steps of urban travel demand forecasting - trip 
generation, trip distribution, modal split and trip assignment, basics of urban 
transportation network, basics of tour -based or activity -based travel demand model, land 
use transport model, urban mass transportation, urban goods movement, Basics of 
activity -based model  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. L.R. Kadiyali, Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning  
2. Williumsen and Ortuzar, Modelling Transport  
3. Kanafani, Transp. Demand Analysis.  
4. B.G. Hutchinson, Principles of Urban Transport System Planning  
5. Marvin L. Manheim, Fundamentals Of Transportation Systems Analysis, Volume 1  
6. Travel Demand Software for example T RANSCA, CUBE  
 
Subject Code:    
CE 6L403  Subject Name:  Pavement Material 
Characterization  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 04  
 
Pre-requisite(s): None  
Subgrade Soil: Classification, desirable properties, determination of soil strength 
characteristics, resilient modulus, Road aggregates: classification, properties of 
aggregates, design of aggregate gradation, Bituminous road binders: bitumen, emulsions, 
cut backs and modified binders, Rheology of bituminous binders, modified binders, Hot 
mix, Warm mix and Cold mix  Bituminous constructions, Mix design: Marshall method and 
Superpave procedure, Visco -elastic and fatigue properties of bituminous mixtures, 
Requirements of paving concrete, design of mixes for recycling of bituminous and 
concrete pavement surfaces.  
Text/R eference Books:  
1. A. T. Papagiannakis and E. A. Masad, Pavement Design and Materials, Wiley 
Publications  
2. J. Read and D. Whiteoak, The Shell Bitumen Handbook, 5th edition, Thomas Telford 
Ltd 
3. Asphalt Institute, Asphalt Binder Handbook, Manual Series No. 2 (MS -26). Asphalt 
Institute. Lexington, KY  
4. Asphalt Institute. Mix Design Methods for Asphalt, Manual Series No. 2 (MS -02). 
Asphalt Institute. Lexington, KY  
5. Rajib B. Mallick, Tahar El -Korchi Pavement Engineering: Principles and Practice, 
Second Edition, CRC Pr ess 
6. Roberts, F.L.; Kandhal, P.S.; Brown, E.R.; Lee, D.Y. and Kennedy, T.W. Hot Mix 
Asphalt Materials, Mixture Design, and Construction. National Asphalt Pavement 
Association Education Foundation. Lanham, MD  
 
Subject Code: 
CE4P001  Name: CAD Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit:  2  
Prerequisite: None  
Exposure to commercial software tools for analysis, design and research in civil 
engineering.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
82 
 Subject Code:  
CE6L402  Subject Name:  Fundamentals of Traffic 
Flow Theory  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 04  
 
Pre-requisite(s):  None  
Driver behaviour, traffic information and control systems, traffic studies - volume, speed 
and delay studies, elements of traffic flow theory, PCU concept, characteristics of 
uninterrupted traffic, mathematical theories of traffic flow (Poisson arrivals, binomial and 
negative binomial distributions), headway distributions, gap acceptance, critical gap 
estimation, queuing theory, shock wave, capacity and LOS of Uninterrupted facilities, 
characteristics of interrupted traffic, traffic characteristics at unsignalised intersections, 
queue discharge characteristics at signalised intersections, dilemma zone.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Fred. L. Mannering, Walter P. Kilareski and Scott S. Washburn, P rinciples of Highway 
Engineering and Traffic Analysis, John Wiley & Sons.  
2. D. R. Drew, Traffic Flow Theory and Control, MaGraw -Hill Book Company.  
3. A. D. May, Traffic Flow Fundamentals, Prentice Hall.  
4. Mike Slinn, Peter Guest and Paul Mathews, (2012). Traffic Engineering design,  Taylor 
& Francis.   
5. Roess and McShane, Roger P. Roess, Elena S. Prassas, William R. McShane, Traffic 
Engineering, Pearson.  
6. L. R. Kadiyali, Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning, Khanna Publishers.  
7. Louis J. Pignatro, Traffic Engineering -Theory and Practice, Prentice -Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, New Jersey.  
8. Khisty & Lal, Transportation Engineering, Prentice Hall India.  
9. C. S. Papacostas and P. D. Prevedouros, Transportation Engineering & Planning.  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6P402  Subject Name : Traffic Engineering 
Studies  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit: 02  
 
Pre-requisite(s): None  
Volume studies: Direction, Duration and Classification of Traffic Volume at Mid -Block 
Section and Intersections, Headway Distributions  
Speed studies: Spot Speed Studies  
Journey time and delay studies: Travel Time and Delay Studies by Floating Car Method  
Arrival pattern studies of vehicles, Queue discharge characteristics  
Gap acceptance studies: Study of Gaps, Lags, Critical Gaps  
Intersection delay studies: Delay Measurement at In tersections  
Highway Capacity Estimation: Videographic method, Dynamic PCU  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Currin, T. R. (2013). Traffic Engineering -A Manual for Data Collection and Analysis, 
2nd Edition, Cenage Learning.  
2. Slinn, M. Guest, P., Mattehews, P. (2006). raffic Engineering Design -Principles and 
Practice, 2nd Edition Elseiver.  
3. Highway Capacity Manual, 2010  
4. Relevant Indian Roads Congress (IRC) Codes  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6P401  Subject Name: Pavement Materials 
Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit: 02  
 
Pre-requisite(s): None  
Tests on Soils: Density of soil, CBR, Determination of Field CBR using Dynamic Cone 
Penetrometer  
Tests on Aggregate: gradation, shape tests, specific gravity, water absorption, aggregate 
crushing value, Los Angeles abrasion value, a ggregate impact value.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
83 
 Tests on Bitumen: penetration, viscosity, flash and fire point, ductility and elastic 
recovery, softening point, specific gravity, Ageing of Bitumen, Rheology of Bitumen using 
Dynamic Shear Rheometer  
Tests on Bituminous Mixes: Marsha ll mix design, Bitumen content determination using 
centrifuge extractor.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Highway Material Testing Laboratory Manual  by Khanna S. K., Justo, C.E.G and 
Veeraraghavan, A., Nem Chand & Bros.  
2. Various IRC, ASTM and AASTHO Codes  
 
Subject Code: 
CE6P404  Subject Name: Transportation Systems 
Planning Studio  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit: 02  
 
Pre-requisite(s): None  
Parking study, OD study, travel demand  survey, questionnaire development of mode 
choice,  trip generation, trip distribution, mode choice model parametric and non -
parametric modelling, dealing with  different transportation planning packages and traffic 
engineering packages, economic analysis and accident analysis   
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Simon P. Washington, Matthew G. Karlaftis, Fred L. Mannering, Statistical and 
Econometric Methods for Transportation Data Analysis, CRC Press  
2. User Manuals of various packages  
3. Relevant Indian Roads Congress (IRC) Codes  
4. Williumsen and Ortuzar, Modelling Transport  
 
 
Subject Code: 
CE4L004  Name: Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction - objective, scope and problems of Rock Mechanics. Classification by origin, 
Lithological, Engineering. Rock exploration - rock coring, geophysical methods. 
Laboratory testing of rocks - all types of compressive strength, tensile strength and 
flexural strength tests. Strength and failure of rock s, Griffith’s theory, Coulombs theory, 
rheological methods. In -situ tests on rock mass. Deformation characteristics of rocks, 
instrumentation and measurement of deformation of rocks. Permeability characteristics - 
interstitial water on rocks, unsteady flow  of water through jointed rock mass. Mechanical, 
thermal and electrical properties of rock mass. Correlation between laboratory and field 
properties. Analysis of stresses. Thick wall cylinder, formulae, Kreish equation, Green 
span method. Openings in rock mass and stresses around openings. Pressure tunnels, 
development of plastic zone. Rock support needed to avoid plastic deformation. Lined and 
unlined tunnels. Underground excavation and subsidence. Rock mechanics applications. 
Bearing capacity of homogeneo us as well as discontinuous rocks. Support pressure and 
slip of the joint. Delineation of types of rock failure. Unsupported span of underground 
openings, pillars. Rock slopes. Rock bolting. Plastic mechanics. Tunnels, shapes, usages, 
Methods of Constructi on, Problems associated with tunnels, tunnelling in various subsoil 
conditions and rocks.  
Text/Reference Books:  
5. Goodman, R. E., Introduction to Rock Mechanics, John Wiley and Sons.  
6. Hudson, J.A. and Harrison, J.P. Engineering rock Mechanics: an introduction  to the 
principles, Pergamon publishers.  
7. Chapman, David, Metje, Nicole and Stärk, Alfred, Introduction to Tunnel Construction. 
Spon Publishers, Taylor and Francis Group.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
84 
 8. Brady, B. H. G. and Brown, E. T. Rock Mechanics: for underground mining, Kluwer 
Academic Publishers.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L005  Name: Maintenance and Rehabilitation 
of Concrete Structures  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Maintenance and Repair strategies - Maintenance, repair and rehabilitation, Facets of 
Maintenance, importance  of Maintenance various aspects of Inspection, Assessment 
procedure for evaluating a damaged structure, causes of deterioration; Serviceability and 
Durability of Concrete - Quality assurance for concrete construction concrete properties - 
strength, permeabi lity, thermal properties and cracking. - Effects due to climate, 
temperature, chemicals, corrosion - design and construction errors - Effects of cover 
thickness and cracking; Materials and Techniques for Repair - Special concretes and 
mortar, concrete chem icals, special elements for accelerated strength gain, Expansive 
cement, polymer concrete, sulphur infiltrated concrete, Ferrocement and polymers 
coating for rebars loadings from concrete, mortar and dry pack, vacuum concrete, Gunite 
and Shotcrete, Epoxy i njection, Mortar repair for cracks shoring and underpinning. 
Methods of corrosion protection, corrosion inhibitors, corrosion resistant steels and 
cathodic protection.; Repairs to Structures - Repair of structures distressed due to 
earthquake – Strengtheni ng using FRP Strengthening and stabilization techniques for 
repair.  
Text/Reference Books:  
6. Denison Campbell, Allen and Harold Roper, Concrete Structures, Materials, 
Maintenance and Repair, Longman Scientific and Technical UK.  
7. Allen R.T and Edwards S.C, Rep air of Concrete Structures, Blakie and Sons, UK.  
8. Raikar, R.N., Learning from failures - Deficiencies in Design, Construction and Service 
- R&D Centre (SDCPL), Raikar Bhavan, Bombay.  
9. Santhakumar A.R., Concrete Technology, Oxford University Press, Printed in  India by 
Radha Press, New Delhi.  
10. Emmons, Peter H., Concrete Repair and Maintenance Illustrated Galgotia Publications 
pvt. Ltd.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L022   Name: Bridge Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Types of Bridges and loading standards. Hydraulic Design of Bridges, Foundation for piers 
and abutments, Open Foundation, Pile Foundation, Well Foundation, Bridge Substructure: 
Piers and Abutments. Bridge Superstructure: Design aspects, RC slab deck, Tee Beam 
and Slab deck. Composite Bridges. Pre -stressed concrete bridges, Steel trussed bridges; 
Bridge Construction, Inspection and Maintenance.  
Text/Reference Books:  
4. Ponnuswamy, S, Bridge Engineering, McGraw Hill  
5. Jagadeesh and Jayaram, Design of Bridge Structure, PHI Learning  
6. Victor, D. J., Essentials of Bridge Engineering, Oxford and IBH Publishing  
Subject Code: 
CE4L023  Name: Pre -stressed Concrete  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Concept on Mechanics; Materials; Properties of sections; Stress analysis - three methods; 
Prestressing and Post stressing; Beam design - no tension and ultimate; Poles and slab 
panels; Loss assessment; Composite beams; Design for shear. Large span structures; 
Structural forms and design principles; Special materials, open web and built -up 
structures.  
Text/Reference Books:  
4. Lin and Burns, Design Of Prestressed Concrete Structures, Wiley India  
5. Dayaratnam, P Prestressed Concrete Structures, Oxford and IBH  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
85 
 6. Raju, K., Prestressed Concrete Bridges, CBS  
Subject Code: 
CE4L044  Name: Soil Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Shear strength of cohesionless and cohesive soils, physico -chemical aspects, 
experimental determination of shear strength, failure theories, Yield criteria, influence on 
failure conditions of inter -mediate principal stress, history, drainage, rate of stres s 
applications etc.; Plastic equilibrium in soils, Mohr diagram, active and passive states, 
theories of earth pressure on retaining walls, effect of wall friction on the shape of sliding 
surface, theories of arching, bearing capacity, concepts of general a nd local shear failure, 
critical height of vertical banks, various methods of computation of slope stability, earth 
pressure on timbering of cuts and on free and anchored bulkheads.  
Text/Reference Books:  
6. Lambe, T. W. and Whitman, R. V., Soil Mechanics in SI Version, Wiley, New Delhi.  
7. Scott, R. F., Principles of Soil Mechanics, Addison Wesley, World Student Edition.  
8. Leonards, G. A., Foundation Engineering, McGraw -Hill.  
9. Bowles, J. E., Foundations Analysis and Design, McGraw -Hill.  
10. Peck, R. B., Hanson, W. E., and Thornburn, T. H., Foundation Engineering, John Wiley 
and Sons.  
Subject Code: 
CE4L045  Name: Earth Retaining Structures  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Earth Pressure: Fundamental relationships between the lateral pressures and the strain 
with a back fill. Rankine’s and Coulomb’s theories, Active, passive and earth pressure at -
rest; Backfill with broken surface, wall with broken back, concentrated surchar ge above 
the back fill, earth pressure due to uniform surcharge, earth pressure of stratified 
backfills, saturated and partially saturated backfill. Passive earth pressure in engineering 
practice. Assumption and conditions, point of application of passive earth pressures; 
Bulkheads: Definition and assumptions, conditions of end supports and distribution of 
active earth pressure and bulkheads, bulkheads with free and fixed earth supports, 
equivalent beam method, Improvements suggested by Rowe, Tschebotarioff ’s method, 
Anchorage of bulkheads and resistance of anchor walls, spacing between bulkheads and 
anchor walls, resistance of anchor plates, Consideration of effects of ground water, 
seepage, surcharge loading together with possibility of shallow and deep sl iding failures 
on retaining structure; Sheet Pile wall: Free earth system, fixed earth system, Dead man; 
Tunnel and Conduit: Stress distribution around tunnels, Types of conduits, Load on 
projecting conduits; Arching and Open Cuts: Arching in soils, Braced  excavations, Earth 
pressure against bracings in cuts, Heave of the bottom of cut in soft clays; Reinforced 
earth retaining structures -Design of earth embankments and slopes; Recent advances in 
Earth retaining structures.  
Text/Reference Books:  
6. Das, B. M.,  Principles of Foundation Engineering, Thomson, Indian Edition.  
7. Clayton, C. R. I., Milititsky, J. and Woods, R. I., Earth Pressure and Earth -retaining 
Structures, Chapman and Hall Publishers.  
8. Bowel, J., Foundation Engineering, Analysis and Design, McGraw H ill. 
9. Raj, P., Geotechnical Engineering, Tata McGraw Hill.  
10. Craig, R. F., Soil Mechanics, Chapman and Hall (ELBS).  
Subject Code: 
CE4L051  Name: Remote Sensing and GIS  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Physics of remote sensing: Electromagnetic spectrum, atmospheric effects, energy 
interaction with earth surface features. Platforms and remote sensing sensors: 
Photographic camera, scanners, earth resources satellites, active and passive microwave 
sensors.  Digital image processing: Image rectification, image enhancement, image Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
86 
 classification and accuracy. Image interpretation. Geographical Information System 
(GIS): Map data representation, geographic database concepts and analysis. Application 
of remote sen sing and GIS in land and water resources system and evaluation.  
Text/Reference Books:  
4. Bhatta, B., Remote Sensing and GIS, Oxford University Press.  
5. Mesev, V., Integration of GIS and Remote Sensing, John Wiley & Sons Ltd.  
6. Nayak, S., and Zlatanova, S., Remote Sensing and GIS Technologies for Monitoring 
and Prediction of Disasters, Springer.  
 
Subject Code:   
CE 6L404  Subject Name:   Analysis and Design of 
Pavements  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 04  
 
Pre-requisite(s): None  
Types of Pavements, Pavement Composition, Philosophy of design of flexible, composite 
and rigid pavements, analysis of pavements using different analytical methods, selection 
of pavement design input parameters, traffic loading and volume, material 
characterization , drainage, failure criteria, reliability, design of flexible, composite and 
rigid pavements using different methods (  IRC, AASHTO, Austroads etc), comparison of 
different pavement design approaches, design of overlays.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Y. H. Huang, P avement Analysis and Design,  Pearson Education.  
2. E.J. Yoder and M. W. Witczak, Principles of Pavement Design, McGrawPub.  
3. Rajib B. Mallick, Tahar El -Korchi, Pavement Engineering: Principles and Practice, 
Second Edition, CRC Press  
4. Animesh Das, Analysis of Pavement Structures, CRC Press  
5. Nick Thom, Principles of Pavement Engineering, ICE Publishing  
 
*The examination for this course may be considered for open book examination system.  
 
Subject Code:   
CE6L451  Subject Name:  Design of Transportation 
Facilities and Safety  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit:04  
 
Pre-requisite(s): None  
Geometric design provisions for various transportation facilities, Discussion of controls 
governing geometric design, Route layout and selection, Elements of design - sight 
distances, horizontal alignment, transition curves, super elevation and side fricti on. 
Vertical alignment: - grades, crest and sag curves. Highway cross -sectional elements 
and their design for rural highways, urban streets and hill roads. At -grade Inter -sections 
- sight distance consideration and principles of design, channelisation, min i round -
abouts, layout and design of round -abouts, Design of signalised intersections, capacity 
and LOS for signalised intersections, signal design, signal coordination, interchange 
design templates, entrance and exit ramps, acceleration and deceleration l anes, Bicycle 
and Pedestrian Facility Design; Parking Layout and Design; Terminal Layout and Design.  
Accident prevention through better planning, Designing for safety, Highway operation 
and accident counter measures, Road safety checklists, accident data analysis and its 
prediction models.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. A policy on geometric design of highways and streets, American Association of State 
Highway Officials.  
2. Geometric design standards for urban roads in plains (IRC:86 -1983), The Indian 
Roads Congress.  
3. Geometric design standards for rural (non -urban) highways (IRC:73 -1980), The Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
87 
 Indian Roads Congress, 1980.  
4. Manual of specifications & standards for six laning of highway through public private 
partnership (IRC: SP: 87 -2010), The Indian Roads Congress.  
5. Manua l of specifications & standards for four laning of highway through public 
private partnership (IRC:SP:84 -2009), The Indian Roads Congress.  
6. Hill road manual (IRC:SP:48 -1998), The Indian Roads Congress.  
7. Guidelines for expressways – Part I, Ministry of Road T ransport & Highways.  
8. Guidelines for the design of interchanges in urban areas (IRC:92 -1985), The Indian 
Roads Congress.  
9. Roadside design guide, American Association of State Highway Officials.  
10. Manual of geometric design standards for Canadian roads, Transportation 
Associations of Canada.  
11. Pline, J.L., Traffic Engineering Handbook, Institute of Transportation Engineers.  
12. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Federal Highway Administration.  
13. Highway Capacity Manual 2010, Transportation Research Board.  
14. S.K. Khanna and C.E.G. Justo, Highway Engineering, Khanna Publishers, Roorkee, 
MXRoad Suite and manual for geometric design  
 
Subject Code:    
CE6L452  Subject Name:    Economic Evaluation of 
Transportation System    L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit:03  
 
Pre-requisite(s): None  
concept of demand and its elasticity, concept of supply -side in transport, demand -supply 
interaction; appraisal and economic evaluation of transportation projects, Travel demand 
and value of time, Willingness -to-pay, Willingness -to-accept; valuation of user’s benefit 
and transport pricing policy, economic evaluation of highway projects in India; Road -
users’ cost study in India -Objectives and Methodology, Using behavioural data for 
evaluation of transport infrastructure; stated and rev ealed preference data, binary and 
multinomial logit, maximum likelihood, case studies on choice modelling and estimation 
of value of planning attribute, multi -criteria analysis and public Policy  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Studies in the economics of transportat ion by Beckmann et al.  
2. Applied Transport Economics by Stuart Cole  
3. McCarthy, P. Transportation Economics, Blackwell Publishers  
4. Transportation Decision Making: Principles of Project Evaluation and Programming, 
Wiley, by Kumares C. Sinha , Samuel Labi , 
5. C. Jotin Khisty, B. Kent L all, Transportation Engineering: An Introduction, Prentice 
Hall. 
6. Indian Roads Congress, “Manual for Road Investment Decision Model”, Special 
Publication 38, New Delhi.  
7. Indian Roads Congress, “Manual on Economic Analysis of Highway Projects”, Special 
Public ation 30, New Delhi. Revised version.  
8. John Hibbs , Transport Economics & Policy: A Practical Analysis of Performance, 
Efficiency and Marketing Objectives Kogan Page,.  
9. Economics of Urban Transport by Kenneth A Small and Erik T Verhoef  
10. Principles of Traffic and Highway Engineering by Garber and Hoel  
11. Economic Evaluation of highway projects in India -IRC 
12. Road Users cost study in India  - IRC 
Subject Code:      
CE6L453  Subject Name:  Analysis of 
Transportation Systems   L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit:03  
 
Pre-requisite(s): None  
Transportation demand theory, supply theory and their interaction, transportation 
network and its analysis, shortest -path algorithm, concept in minimization problems and 
convex optimization, mathematical formulation of user equilibrium (UE) and System Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
88 
 optimal (SO) traffic assignment methods, Uniqueness of UE and SO traffic assignment, 
solution of UE and SO traffic assignment, traffic assignment with variable demand and 
link-interaction, combined distribution -assignment models, Supernetworks, Stochastic 
network loading and stochastic user -equilibrium, multi -class assignment, basics of 
optimal network geometry and non -convex functions, concept of dynamic traffic 
assignment, brief introduction of probabilistic modelling, Queuing theory and its 
applications, spa tially distributed queues, application of network models, Simulation in 
the urban context.   
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Yosef Sheffi, Urban Transportation Networks  
2. Transportation Systems Engineering: Theory and Methods by Ennio Cascetta  
3. Marvin L. Manheim, Fundamentals Of Transportation Systems Analysis, Volume 1  
4. Urban Operations Research by Larson and Odoni  
5. Ran, B., and Boyce, D. E., Modeling Dynamic Transportation Network - An 
Intelligent Transportation System Oriented Approach, Springer -Verlag, Heidelberg  
6.  
Subject Code:       
CE6L454  Subject Name   Pavement Evaluation and 
Management  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit:04  
 
Pre-requisite(s): None  
Types of pavements, Distresses in flexible and rigid pavements , Techniques for 
functional and structural evaluation of pavements, pavement rehabilitation techniques, 
overlay design procedures, recycling of flexible and rigid pavements, Maintenance of 
paved and unpaved roads, Pavement management systems, Introduction to HDM -4 
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Y. H. Huang, Pavement Anal ysis and Design, Second ed.,Pearson Education  
2. Rajib B. Mallick, Tahar El -Korchi, Pavement Engineering: Principles and Practice, 
Second Edition, CRC Press  
3. Derek Pearson, Deterioration and Maintenance of Pavements, ICE Publishing  
4. Ralph Haas, W. Ronald Hudson, John P. Zaniewski, Modern pavement management  
Modern Pavement Management, Krieger Pub Co  
5. Croney, D. and P. Croney, The design and performance of road pavements, 
McGraw -Hill Book Company, London, UK.  
 
Subject Code:       
CE6L455  Subject Name    Airport Planning and 
Design  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit:03  
 
Pre-requisite(s): None  
Air transport and its characteristics, Capacity and configuration, Runway and Taxi way 
design, Design, maintenance and rehabilitation of airfield pavements, terminal area lay -
out, air traffic control, Grading and drainage, Environmental guidelines for airport 
projects, air -traffic demand estimation.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Khanna,S. K., Arora A. K. and Jain S. S., Airport Planning and Design, Nem Chand & 
Bros. 
2. Ashford, N. and Wright, P.H., Airport Engineering, Third ed, John Wiley & Sons  
3. Robert Horonjeff, Francis X. McKelvey, William J. Sproule and Seth B. Young,  
Planning and Design of Airports, Fifth Ed., McGraw Hill Pub.  
 
Subject Code:         
CE6L456   Subject Name   Public Transportation 
System  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit:03  
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
89 
 Pre-requisite(s): None  
Urban Passenger Transport Modes Classifications, Role of Mass Transportation System, 
Transit Modes and Characteristics, System Performance, Capacity, Quality of Service, 
efficiency and utilization,  trip makers’ perception analysis to various travel attributes, 
Willingness -to-pay estimation,  demand analysis and  user’s benefit  policy issue with 
reference to public transportation service improvement, optimal transport pricing policy, 
planning Issues, Route Determination, Network Design, Service Policy and Schedule 
development, Life Cycle cost in public transportation, Scheduling, Priority Measures and 
their Implementations, Issues and Challenges related to development of Mass 
Transportat ion System, Para -transits  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Public Transit Planning and Operation: Theory, Modelling and Practice by Avishai 
Ceder  
2. Urban Transit Systems and Technology by Vukan R. Vuchik.  
3. Urban Transit: Operations, Planning and Economics by Vukan R. Vu chik 
4. Studies in the economics of transportation by Beckmann et al.  
5. Applied choice analysis: A Primer by David Hensher and Willium Greeene  
6. Transportation Decision Making: Principles of Project Evaluation and Programming, 
Wiley,2007 by Kumares C. Sinha, Samuel Labi  
7. Fundamentals of Transportation Engineering by Fricker and Whitford  
Subject Code: 
CE6L006  Subject Name: Construction Project 
Management  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Principles of Project Management, Project Planning, Introduction to scheduling -
work/project break down structures, Bar -charts; Principles of application of CPM and 
PERT; Precedence Method; Updating; Time - cost tradeoffs, Resource constrained 
scheduling;R esource leveling Project control; Performance Measurement, Earned value; 
Multiple Construction Projects; Other network techniques; Project Management Software 
Packages.  
Books  
 Construction Project Management by Neeraj Kumar Jha , (Pearson Education India)  
 Construction Management by Trefor Williams (Pearson Education India)  
 Construction project managemnet techniques and practice by Krishnan Chitkara (Tata 
Mcgraw Hill)  
 Purifoy, “Construction Planning, equipments and Methods”, Mc Graw Hill, Tokyo, 
Japan.   
Subject Code: 
CE6L011  Subject Name: Environmental 
Management & Impact Assessment  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Environmental management, problems and strategies; Review of political, ecological and 
remedial actions; Future strategies; multidisciplinary environmental strategies, the 
human, planning, descision -making and management dimensions. Environment Risk 
assess ment, Pollution prevention and Waste minimization; sustainable development 
(SD), Life cycle assessment. Environmental impact assessment (EIA), definitions and 
concepts, Screening and scoping criteria; Rapid and comprehensive EIA, Legislative and 
environmen tal clearance procedures in India and other countries, Siting criteria; CRZ; 
Public participation; Resettlement and rehabilitation. Practical applications of EIA; EIA 
methodologies; Baseline data collection; Prediction and assessment of impacts on 
physical , biological and socio -economic environment; Environmental management plan; 
Post project monitoring, initial environmental examination (IEE), environmental impact 
statement (EIS), environmental appraisal, environmental audit (EA); Environmental 
impact fact ors and areas of consideration, measurement of environmental impact, 
organisation, scope and methodologies of EIA, case studies stressing physical aspects of 
environment. Evolution of EIA; EIA at project; Regional and policy levels; Strategic EIA; Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
90 
 EIA proc ess;  
Books  
 Canter, L., Environmental Impact Assessment, McGraw Hill, 1996.  
 Kiely, G., Environmental Engineering, Tata McGraw Hill, 2007  
 Rau, G.J. and Wooten, C.D., Environmental Impact Analysis Handbook, McGraw Hill, 
1980.  
 Dhameja, Suresh K., Environment al Engineering and Management, S. K. Kataria & 
Sons 
 World Bank, ‘Environmental Assessment Source Book’, Environment Dept., 
Washington D.C., 1991  
 Welford, R., Corporate Environmental Management, Earthscan Publications Limited, 
London, 1996.  
 Sayre, D., Insid e ISO 14000 : Competitive Advantage of Environmental Management, 
St. Louis Press, Florida, 1996.  
 Rosencranz, A., Divan, S. and  Noble, M.L., Environmental Law and Policy in India : 
Cases, Materials and Statutes, Tripathi Pvt. Ltd, Bombay, 1992.  
Asolekar, S. R. and Gopichandran, R. Preventive Environmental Management - An Indian 
Perspective Foundation Books Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi (the Indian association of Cambridge 
University Press, UK), 2005.  
Subject Code: 
CE6L022  Subject Name: Ground Improvement  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction, ground improvements schemes for cohesive soil sites (preloading, staged 
construction, accelerated consolidation with prefabricated drains, granular columns, lime 
columns, electro -osmosis, compaction piles, deep mixing, and vibro -replacement), 
ground improvement schemes for cohesionless soil sites (deep dynamic compaction, 
vibro-compaction, blast densification, grouting, and jet grouting), mechanically stabilized 
earthwork, soil nailing, ground anchors, light  weight fill, and monitoring and quality 
control in ground improvement projects.  
Books  
 P. Puroshothama Raju, Ground Improvement Techniques, Laxmi Publications, New 
Delhi.  
 M.P. Moseley and K. Kirsch, Ground Improvement, Spon Press, Taylor and Francis 
Group.   
 B. M. Das, Principles of Foundation Engineering, Cengage Learning.  
 Buddhima Indraratna and Jian J Chu, Ground Improvement: Case Histories, Elsevier.  
 Chris A. Raison, Ground and Soil Improvement, Thomas telford, UK.  
 Robert M. Koerner., Designing with Geos ynthetics, Pearson Prentice Hall.  
Subject Code: 
CE6L023  Subject Name: Computational 
Geomechanics  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Numerical modeling, constitutive modeling of soils and rock, continuum and discrete 
element modeling. Concept of stress and strain, principle stresses and strains.  
Octahedral stresses and strains, finite element discretization of a continuum, 
geomechanics problems of plane strain and axisymmetric problem.  Failure criteria for 
soils, associated and non -associated fl ow rule. Finite elements for non -linear material 
problems in soil mechanics computational procedures. Finite difference approach. 
Simulation of soil -structure interaction problems, application in consolidation, bearing 
capacity and slope stability problems  using numerical approaches.  
Books  
 Chandrakant S. Desai and J.T. Christian Numerical Methods in Geotechnical 
Engineering, McGraw -Hill Publishers.  
 Plasticity and Geomechanics by R. O. Davis, A. P. S. Selvadurai, Cambridge 
University Press  
 Finite Element Analysis in Geotechnical Engineering: Theory and Application Author: 
David M. Potts and Lidija Zdravkovic (January 1, 2001)  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
91 
  John T. Christian, Numerical Methods in Geotechnical Engineering, McGraw -Hill 
Publishers  
 Computational Geomechanics with Special Ref erence to Earthquake Engineering by O. 
C. Zienkiewicz, A. H. C. Chan, M. Pastor, and B. A. Schrefler (Hardcover - May 11, 
1999), Publisher: Wiley  
Subject Code: 
CE6L025  Subject Name: Geotechnical Risk and 
Reliability  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction to probabilistic geotechnical engineering, variability measures, random 
variables, probability mass and density functions, moments of distribution, modelling of 
uncertainty, engineering judgment, spatial variability of soil, autocovarianc e functions, 
functions of random fields, levels of reliability, loads and resistances, reliability methods, 
first order second moment (FOSM) method, Hasofer -Lind approach, Response Surface 
Method, Monte Carlo simulations.  
Books  
 Achintya Haldar and Sankaran  Mahadevan, Probability, Reliability, and Statistical 
Methods in Engineering Design, John Wiley and Sons  
 Gregory Baecher and John Christian, Reliability and Statistics in Geotechnical 
Engineering, John Wiely and Sons, Inc.  
 Alfredo Hua -Sing Ang and Wilson H . Tang, Probability Concepts in Engineering 
Planning and Design: Basic Principles (Vol. I), John Wiely and Sons, Inc.  
 Alfredo Hua -Sing Ang and Wilson H. Tang, Probability Concepts in Engineering 
Planning and Design: Decision, Risk, and Reliability (Vol. II ), John Wiely and Sons, 
Inc. 
 Alfredo Hua -sing Ang, Wilson H. Tang, Probability Concepts In Engineering: Emphasis 
On Applications In Civil & Environmental Engineering, Publisher: Wiley  
 Robert E. Melchers, Structural Reliability Analysis and Prediction, John  Wiley and 
Sons.  
 Andrzej S Nowak and Kevin R. Collins, Reliability of Structures  
 Erik Vanmarcke, Random Fields: Analysis and Synthesis, The MIT Press, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts.  
Subject Code: 
MA6L002  Name: Advanced Techniques in  
Operation Research  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Prerequisite: None  
One variable unconstrained optimization, multivariable unconstrained optimisation, 
Karush -Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions for constrained optimization, quadratic 
programming, separable programming, convex and non convex programming, steepest 
and Quasi -Newton method.  
Dynamic Programming: Characteristics of dynamic problems, deterministic dynamic 
programming and probabilitistic dynamic programming, Network analysis, Shortest path  
problems, minimum spanning tree problem, max imum flow problem, minimum cost flow 
problem, network simplex, interior point methods, stochastic programming, Nonlinear 
goal programming applications, Geometric Programming.  
Multi-objective Optimization Problems: Linear and non linear programming problems , 
Weighting and Epsilon method, P -norm methods, Gradient Projection Method, STEM 
method, Convex Optimization.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Rao, S. S., Engineering Optimization Theory and Practices, John Wiley and Sons, 
2009 
2. Ehrgott, M., Multi -criteria Optimizatio n, Springer 2006  
3. Miettien, K.M., Non -linear Multi -objective Optimization, Kluwers International Series, 
2004 
4. Deb, K., Multi -Objective Optimization using Evolutionary Algorithms, 
JohnWiley&Sons, 2001.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
92 
  
List of Lateral Courses offer ed by School of Infrastructure for 
Other Schools  
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Lateral – I (Any one will be offered)  
Building materials and Construction  CE2L011  3-0-0 3 3 92 
Infrastructure Planning and Management  CE2L012  3-0-0 3 3 92 
Lateral – II/III (Any one will be offered)  
Traffic Engineering and Management  CE3L021  3-0-0 3 3 93 
Construction Planning and Management  CE3L022  3-0-0 3 3 93 
Environmental Pollution Management  CE3L031  3-0-0 3 3 94 
Geo-environmental Management  CE3L032  3-0-0 3 3 94 
 
Syllabus  
Subject Code: 
CE2L011  Name: Building materials and Construction  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit:  3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction to Civil Engineering; Major Divisions; Civil Engineering Infrastructures; Ethics 
in Civil Engineering; Properties of construction material and their evaluation; test 
methods and specifications; Cement – chemical composition, properties such as setting, 
strength, fineness, hydration; Aggregates – sources, properties, chemical reactivity; 
Concret e - constituents, proportioning, properties in fresh and hardened state, 
characteristic strength, quality control, transportation and placing, testing, porosity; 
Admixtures – chemical, mineral; Steel – properties, types of steel, steel in civil 
engineering ; Bricks – manufacture, properties and classification; masonry bonds;  Wood - 
Structure, defects & preservation; Paints,  New materials – Fibre reinforced plastics 
(FRPs), epoxy -coated bars, Geo -synthetics etc., Construction methodologies and 
equipment.  
Books:  
 Taylor, G.D., Materials of Construction, Prentice Hall  
 Mehta P.K. and Montiero, P.M.J., Concrete – Material, Microstructure and Properties, 
Tata Mcgraw Hill  
 Gambhir, M.L., Concrete Technology, Tata Mcgraw Hill  
 Neville, A.M. and Brooks, J.J., Concrete Technology, ELBS/Longman  
 Neville, A.M., Properties of Concrete, 4th Edition, ELBS/Longman  
 Dayaratnam, P. Brick and Reinforced Brick Structures, Oxford and IBH  
 Ghose, D.N., Construction Materials, Tata Mcgraw Hill  
 Relevant IS codes for testing and  specifications  
Subject Code: 
CE2L012  Name: Infrastructure Planning and 
Management  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Basic concepts of infrastructure sectors in India (Power sector, Water Supply and 
Sanitation Sector, Road, Rail, Air, and Port Transportation Sectors, Telecommunications 
Sector, etc.); urban & rural infrastructure, infrastructure players; private involveme nt in 
infrastructure projects (Infrastructure Privatization, Types of PPPs, case studies); project 
assessment based on economic criteria - concept of NPV, EUAW, Benefit -Cost Ratio (BCR), 
IRR etc., multi -criteria analysis of infrastructure projects, ranking of influential 
parameters; network analysis, decision making processes - PERT and CPM analysis; Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
93 
 project monitoring, maintenance management, risks in infrastructure planning and 
implementation and its types (political risks, socio -environmental  risks, cultu ral risks, 
legal or contractual issues), strategies for risk mitigation in infrastructure planning.  
  
Books:  
 Hudson , W. and Ralph, H. , Infrastructure Management: Integrating Design, 
Construction, Maintenance, Rehabilitation and Renovation, Tata Mc Graw Hills.  
 Garber, N.J. and Hoel, L.A., Principles of T raffic and Highway Engineering, Cengage 
Learning.  
 Fricker, J.D., and Whitford, R.K., Fundamentals of Transportation Engineering: A 
Multimodal Systems Approach, Pearson Prentice Hall  
 The India Infrastructure Report, Ministry of Finance, Govt of India.  
 Jha, N.K., Construction Project Management, Pearson Education India  
 Williams, T., Construction Management, Pearson Education India  
Subject Code: 
CE3L021  Name: Traffic Engineering and Management  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction to traffic  engineering; Fundamental parameters and relations of traffic flow; 
Traffic stream models; Traffic speed and volume measurement procedures: Capacity and 
Level of service LOS; Ramp metering;  Principles of traffic control; Uncontrolled 
intersection;  Channe lization; Traffic rotary;  Grade separated intersection;  Basic 
principle and elements of Traffic signal design, Coordinated traffic signal;Specialised 
Traffic Studies: Parking Studies; Accident Studies; Fuel consumption and emission 
studies; Congestion st udies; Toll operation: Pedestrian studies; Intelligent transportation 
system; Traffic Control, Traffic Management  
Books:  
 Mannering, F.L., Kilareski, W.P. and Washburn, S.S.,  Principles of Highway 
Engineering and Traffic Analysis, John Wiley & Sons.  
 Drew,  D.R., Traffic Flow Theory and Control, McGraw -Hill Book Company.  
 May, A.D., Traffic Flow Fundamentals, Prentice Hall.  
 Slinn, M., Guest, P. and Mathews, P., Traffic Engineering design, Elsevier.  
 Roess, R.P.,  Prassas, E.S.,  McShane W.R., Traffic Engineeri ng, Prentice Hall  
 Kadiyali, L.R., Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning, Khanna Publishers.  
 Pignatro, L.J., Traffic Engineering -Theory and Practice, Prentice -Hall 
 Khanna, S. K.  and Justo, C.E.G., Highway Material Testing, Nem Chand & Bros.  
 Khisty, C. J. and Lal, B.K., Transportation Engg., Prentice Hall India.  
 Papacostas C.S.  and Prevedouros, P.D., Transportation Engineering & Planning, 
Prentice Hall  
Subject Code: 
CE3L022  Name: Construction Planning and 
Management  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Construction and fabrication methods; Pre -fabrication techniques; choice of equipment 
safety features and Regulations; Agreements and Contracts; Use of IS codes and Building 
Laws; Value Analysis; Feasibility studies; Economics of project  evaluation; Finance, 
material and man power development; Network analysis; Levelling of Resources; Site 
organisation; layout; work study; Decision making processes; CPM and L.P. Project 
monitoring; Maintenance management; Case studies.  
Books:  
 Jha, N.K., Construction Project Management, Pearson Education India  
 Williams, T., Construction Management, Pearson Education India  
 Chitkara, K., Construction Project Managemnet techniques and practice, Tata McGraw 
Hill 
 Purifoy, Construction Planning, equipments and M ethods, Tata McGraw Hill  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
94 
 Subject Code: 
CE3L031  Name: Environmental Pollution Management  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Man and environment, Their inter relationships. Types of environmental pollutants, their 
sources and effects. Water Pollution and Control, Indoor pollution, Air pollution, sources, 
effects and controls technologies. Noise pollution and control, Industrial wastes and their 
treatment. Solid wastes, generation, collection, processing and disposal. Environmental 
impact asse ssment and auditing. Introduction to Environmental standards, laws and 
policies. Global issues on environment, Waste minimization, Building environment 
services.  
 
Books:  
 Kiely, G., Environmental Engineering, Tata McGraw Hill.  
 Garg, S. K., Sewage Disposal and Air Pollution Engineering, Khanna Publication.  
 Cunningham, W.P. and Cunningham, M.A. 2002, Principles of Environmental Science, 
Tata McGraw -Hill Publishing.  
 Nathanson, J.A., (2002), Basic Environmental Technology, Prentice Hall of India, New 
Delhi.  
 Peavy, H. S., Rowe, D. R. and Tchobanoglous, G., Environmental Engineering, 
McGraw -Hill International Ed.  
 Masters, G.M., Ela, W.P., Introduction to Environmental Engineering and Science, 
Pearson Education.  
 Asolekar, S. R. and Gopichandran, R. Preventive Envir onmental Management - An 
Indian Perspective Foundation Books Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi (the Indian association of 
Cambridge University Press, UK).  
Subject Code: 
CE3L032  Name: Geo -environmental Management  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credit: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction, Perspectives, Forms of waste and their engineering properties; 
Geosysthetics and Applications; Waste disposal sites, Landfills; Ash ponds & dykes; 
Subsurface Contamination; Three "RS", Geotechnical Reuse of Waste materials; 
International Stan dards; Mechanics of erosion and erosion control; Landslides and their 
control.  
Books:  
 Sharma, H.D., and Reddy, K.R., “Geoenvironmental Engineering: Site Remediation, 
Waste Containment, and Emerging Waste Management Technologies” John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc.  
 Lakshmi N. Reddi, Hilary I. Inyang, Geoenvironmental Engineering: Principles and 
Applications, Marcel Dekker Inc, Publishers.  
 Yong, R. N., Young, Raymond N., Geoenvironmental Engineering: Contaminated Soils, 
Pollutant Fate, and Mitigation, Lewis Publicatio n. 
 