Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
1 
 Table of Content  
1. Compliance report  
2. Curriculum for B.Tech. in Electrical Engineering and Dual Degree Program with B.Tech. in 
Electrical Engineering and M.Tech. in Power Electronics and Drives  
3. B. Tech and Dual Degree ( 1st and 2nd Semester Common C ourses)  
a. First Semester courses  
b. Second Semester Courses  
c. Syllabus  
4. B. Tech (3rd Semester – 8th Semester  Courses ) 
a. Third – Eighth  Semester courses  
b. Syllabus for Core Courses  
c. Elective Courses  
d. Syllabus for Elective Courses  
5. Dual Degree (7th - 10th Semester  Courses ) 
a. Sevent h to Tenth Semester Courses  
b. Syllabus  
6. Lateral Courses offered to Other Schools  
a. List of Courses  
b. Syllabus  
7. Summary of Course Credits  
a. B.Tech program  
b. Dual Degree program  
  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
2 
 Complian ce Report  (B.Tech. Program)  
Components  Subjects  Credit 
Recommended  Credit 
Approved  
1. Common Core  (i) English  4 4  
(ii) Basic Science and 
Mathematics  20 20 
(iii) General Sciences  6 6 
(iv) Engineering Sciences  27 27 
2. Breadth Basket  (i) Breadth -1 
(ii) Breadth -2 
(iii) Breadth -3 
(iv) Breadth -4 12-14 3/4 
3  
3/4 
3/4 
3. Misc ellaneous  (i) Seminar  
(ii) Internship  
(iii) Project  14 2 
2 
10 
4. Laterals  (i) Lateral -1  
(ii) Lateral -2  
(iii) Lateral -3  9-12 3 
3/4 
3/4 
5. Verticals  Theory  58-68 2nd year - 20 
3rd year –23/24  
4th year – 19/25  
Laboratory  18-24 18 
TOTAL   168-189 172/184  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
3 
 Curriculum for B.  Tech. in Electrical Engineering  
 & 
 Dual Degree Program me (B. Tech. in Electrical Engineering and M.  Tech. in 
Power Electronics and Drives )  
 
1. The curriculum for 1st and 2nd Semesters are same for all B Tech and dual degree programs.  
2. The curriculum for (1) B.  Tech. Degree in Electrical Engin eering and (2) B.  Tech. Degree in 
Electrical Engineering and M.  Tech. Degree in Power Electronics and Drives Dual Degree 
program are same up  to 6th Semester.  
3. For 7th and 8th Semester, the curriculum for B.  Tech. program has a combination of core, 
elective subjects and final year B.  Tech. project.  
4. From  7th up to 10th Semester, there are combination of core and elective subjects  for dual 
degree program . All core subjects of B.  Tech and M.  Tech Programs are included.  
5. Ther e are final year B.  Tech project part 1  and 2 in both B.  Tech and Dual Degree programs . 
6. In dual degree programme, t here are M. Tech Thesis part 1 and 2 in the 9th and 10th Semesters, 
respectively, similar to M.  Tech programs . 
7. The recommended total credit range for B.  Tech program is 168 -189. For Dual Degree program 
the recommended total credit range is 220 -225.  
  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
4 
 1st Semester and 2nd Semester (Common to All Disciplines of Study)  
SEMESTER – I 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Mathematics -1 MA1L001  3-1-0 4 4 5 
Physics/  
Chemistry  PH1L001/ 
CY1L001  3-1-0 4 4 6-7 
 Mechanics / English for Communications  or  
 Learning English  ME1L001/  
HS1L001  
or HS1L002  3-1-0/ 
3-0-2 or  
3-1-0 4 4/ 
5 or 4  7-10 
Electrical Technology / Introduction to 
Programing and Data Structures  EE1L001 / 
CS1L001   
3-1-0 4 4 11-12 
Introduction to Manufacturing Processes /  
Engineering Drawing and Graphics  ME1P001/ 
CE1P001  0-0-3/ 
1-0-3 2/3 3/4 12-13 
Physics Laboratory/  Chemistry Laboratory  PH1P001/ 
CY1P001  0-0-3 2 3 13-14 
Electrical Technology Laboratory   / 
Introduction to Programing and Data 
Structures Laboratory  EE1P001/  
CS1P001  0-0-3 2 3 14 
Extra Academic Activity -1 ID1T001  0-0-3 1 3  
  Total  22/23+1  25/27 or 26+3   
SEMESTER – II  
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Mathematics -2 MA1L002  3-1-0 4 4 15 
Chemistry/  
Physics  CY1L001/ 
PH1L001  3-1-0 4 4 6-7 
English for Communication   or Learning 
English /   Mechanics  HS1L001 or  
HS 1L002/ 
ME1L001  3-0-2 or              
3-1-0/ 
3-1-0 4 5 or 4/  
4 7-10 
Introduction to Programming and Data 
Structures/ Electrical Technology  CS1L001/ 
EE1L001  3-1-0 4 4 11-12 
Engineering Drawing and Graphics  / 
Introduction to Manufacturing Processes  CE1P001/ 
ME1P001  1-0-3/  
0-0-3 3/2 4/3 13-14 
Chemistry Laboratory/ Physics Laboratory  CY1P001/ 
PH1P001  0-0-3 2 3 12-13 
Electrical Technology Laboratory   / 
Introduction to Programing and Data 
Structures Laboratory  EE1P001/  
CS1P001  0-0-3 2 3 14 
Extra Academic Activity -2 ID1T002  0-0-3 1 3  
  Total  23/22+1  27 or 26/ 25+3   
 
 
Syllabus for each course is given in the following pages.  
  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
5 
 Syllabus for First Year Courses (Common to All Disciplines of Study)  
SEMESTER – I 
Subject Code:  MA1L001  Subject Name: 
Mathematics -1 L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
Calculus:  Rolle’s theorem, Lagranges theorem, Cauchy ’s mean value theorem 
(Taylor’s and Maclaurin theorems with remainders), Indeterminate forms, Concavity 
and convexity of a curve, points of inflexion, maximum, minimum of a function, 2nd  
derivative test for max min, Asymptotes and curvature, Cartesian curve tracing, polar 
curve  tracing.   
Calculus of Several Variables :  Limit, continuity and differentiability of functions of 
several variables, partial derivatives and their geometrical inte rpretation, differentials, 
derivatives of composite and implicit functions, derivatives of higher order and their 
commutativity, Euler’s theorem on homogeneous functions, harmonic functions, 
Taylor’s expansion of functions of several variables, maxima and minima of functions 
of several variables, Lagrange’s method of multipliers.   
Vector Calculus:  Double and triple integrals, Scalar and vector fields, level surfaces, 
directional derivative, Gradient, Curl, Divergence, line and surface integrals, theorems 
of Green, Gauss and Stokes. Beta and Gamma functions.  
Ordinary Differential Equations:  First order differential equations, exact, linear and 
Bernoulli’s form, second order differential equations with constant coefficients, Euler’s 
equations, particular integ rals by: variation of parameters, undetermined coefficients, 
operator method, system of differential equations.   
 
Text Books:  
1. Narayan S. and Mittal P. K.  Differential Calculus and Integral Calculus , S. Chand & 
Company Ltd.  
2. Thomas   G. B.  and Finney   R. L.  Calculus and Analytic Geometry , Pearson  
3. Kreyszig E.  Advanced Engineering Mathematics , John Wiley & Sons  
5. Simmons G. F. and Robertson J. S.  Differential Equations with applications and 
Historical notes , Tata McGraw -Hill Publishing Compa ny Limited, New Delhi, India  
 
Reference Books:  
1. Bartle R. G. and Sherbert D. R . Introduction to Real Analysis , Wiley India  
2. Jain R. K. and Iyengar S. R. K.   Advanced Engineering Mathematics,  Narosa  
3. Apostol T. M.  Calculus - Vol.2, Wiley India  
4. Ross S. L. Differential Equations , Wiley India  
5. Coddington E. A.  An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations , Prentice Hall  
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
6 
 Subject Code:  PH1L001  Subject Name:  Physics  L-T-P: 3-
1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
Classical Physics: Review of Newtonian mechanics, Lagrangian mechanics, constraints, 
principle of virtual work, D’Alembert’s principle, Action Principle and Lagrange's 
equations,   Velocity dependent potentials, Legendre Transformation and Hamiltonian 
equat ions, Central forces, Kepler’s problem, Waves and Oscillations, Damped and 
Forced Oscillations, normal modes, Basics of Special Relativity, Galilean and Lorentz 
transformations, Time dilation and length contraction, relativistic kinematics and 
mass-energy equivalence. Electromagnetic Waves and Optics: Maxwell’s equations, 
wave equation, plane electromagnetic waves, longitudinal and transverse waves, 
superposition, wave packets, two and three dimensional waves, energy - momentum, 
Poynting’s theorem, electroma gnetic boundary conditions, Laser, Young’s experiment, 
interferometers, diffraction, Fraunhofer diffraction (single slit), dispersion. Wave 
Mechanics: Failure of classical physics, qualitative review of relevant experiments, de 
Broglie waves, uncertainty p rinciple, wave function and Schrodinger equation, 
probability interpretation, particle on a chain, potential barrier and quantum tunneling, 
potential well, Harmonic oscillator, operator algebra, Hydrogen atom and angular 
momentum algebra.  
 
Text/ Reference Books:  
 
1.   Crawford F.S.   Waves,  Vol. 3, Berkely Physics Series . 
2.   Goldstein,  Classical Mechanics , Pole and Safko, Pearson Education Inc.  
3.   Saleh and Teich.  Fundamentals of Photonics , Wiley -Interscience.  
4.   Ghatak A.  Optics , McGraw -Hill. 
5.   Griffiths D.J.  Introduction to Quantum Mechanics , Pearson Education Inc.  
6.   Pain H. J.  The Physics of Vibrations and Waves , Wiley.  
7.   Resnick R.  Introduction to Special Relativity , John Wiley (Asia).  
8.   Landau L. and Lifshitz E.  Mechanics , Oxford   
9.   Zweibach B.   A First Course in String Theory , Cambridge University Press  
10.  Hecht E.  Introduction to Optics , Addison -Wesley.   
11.  Feynmann Lecture series on Physics.  
12.  Sakurai J. J.  Modern Quantum Mechanics , Benjamin -Cummings.  
 
Subject Code: CY1L 001 Subject Name: Chemistry  L-T-P: 3-
1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
Energetics & Kinetics:  (a) Basic Concepts and Laws of Thermodynamics; Entropy; 
Engineering Devices: Efficiency &  Conversion; Thermochemistry; Bioenergetics. (b) 
Basic Rate Laws; Multistep Reactions; Activation Energy. (c) Transport of Ions and 
Gases in bi ofluids and across biomembranes; Equilibrium:  Proton Equilibrium (aqueous 
& non -aqueous) including Buffers. Phase  Equilibrium.  Redox & Electrochemistry:  Basic 
Concepts & Laws; Battery (Automobile to Ni -Cd and beyond); Fuel Cells; Latimer, Frost, 
and Pourbaix diagram; Corrosion.  Bonding Models & Properties:  (a) In Molecules, 
Supramolecules, Metals and Metal Complexes;  (b) Implications on electrical, ma gnetic, 
and optical properties, (c) Absorption and  Emission Spectroscopy.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
7 
 Functional Materials - Design & Application:  (a) Synthetic Polymers (carbon framework, 
silicon framework, fluorinated polymer), Bio & biodegradable  polymers. (b) Surfactants. 
(c) Nanostructures, Soft materials and Thin Films. (b) Emerging app lications in Energy 
harvesting, Memory  Storage  and Micro -fabrication. Industrial & Bio -inspired 
Chemistry:  (a) Case studies on Industrial organics with emphasis to Drugs (b) 
Oxidation, Reduction, Catalytic hydrogenation and Electron transfer.  Molecules in Daily 
Life: A short tour on molecules behind taste, smell, pain, colour and sex.  
 
 
Text/Reference Books:   
1. Brown L. and Holme, T.  Chemistry for Engineering Students , Thomson Brooks.  
2. Atkins P. and Paula J. D. Atkins’  Physical Chemistry , Oxford.  
3. Shriver, D. F. and Atkins, P. W. Atkins’  Inorganic Chemistry , Oxford.  
4. Morrison R. T. and Boyd R. N.  Organic Chemistry , Prentice Hall.  
5. Steed J. W. and Atwood  J. L. Supramolecular Chemistry , John -Wiley.   
6. Caruther W.  Reagents in Organic Chemistry , Cambridge University Press.  
7. Wiseman P.  An Introduction to Industrial Organic Chemistry , Applied Science.   
8. Hall N.  The New Chemistry , Cambridge University Pres s. 
9. Atkins P. Atkins’  Molecules  Cambridge University Press.  
10. Cengel Y. A. and Boles M. A.  Thermodynamics -An Engineering Approach , Tata 
McGraw - Hill 
 
Subject Code:   ME1L001  Subject Name:   Mechanics  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
Force systems:  Moment of a force about a point an d about an axis; couple moment; 
reduction of a force system to a force and a couple.  Equilibrium:  Free body diagram; 
equations of equilibrium; problems in two and three dimensions; plane frames and 
trusses.  Friction:  Laws of Coulomb friction, problems involving large and small contact 
surfaces;  square threaded screws; belt friction; rolling resistance.  Kinematics and 
Kinetics of particles:  Particle dynamics in rectangular coordinates cylindrical coordinates 
and in terms of path variables; central force motion.  Properties of areas:  Moments of 
inertia and product of inertia of areas, polar moment of inertia, principal axes and 
principal moments of inertia.  Concept of stress and strain:  Normal stress, shear stres s, 
state of stress at a point, ultimate strength, allowable stress, factor of safety; normal 
strain, shear strain, Hooke’s law, Poisson’s ratio, generalized Hooke’s law; analysis of 
axially loaded members.  Torsion:  Torsion of cylindrical bars, torsional st ress, modulus 
of rigidity and deformation.  Flexural loading:  Shear and moment in beams; load, shear 
and moment relationship; shear and moment diagrams; flexure formula; shear stress 
in beams; differential equation of the elastic curve, deflection of beams.  Transformation 
of stress and strain:  Transformation of stress and strain, principal stresses, principal 
strains, Mohr’s circle for stress and strain.  Combined loading:  Axial and torsional; axial 
and bending; axial, torsional and bending.  Column:  Buckling of slender columns, Euler 
bucking load for different end conditions . 
 
 
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Vector Mechanics for Engineers:   Statics and Dynamics  - Ferdinand P. Beer, E. 
Russell   Johnston, Jr. (TMH)  
2. Engineering Mechanics:  Statics and Dynamics  - I.H. Shames (Pearson)  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
8 
 3. Engineering Mechanics  - S. Timoshenko,   D. H. Young (TMH)  
4. Mechanics of Materials  - Ferdinand Beer , E. Russell Johnston, Jr., J. DeWolf (TMH)  
1. 5. Elements of Strength of Materials  - S. Timoshenko,   D. H. Young (East West Press)  
2. 6. Mechanics of Materials  - James M. Gere, Barry J. Goodno (CL Engg)  
3. 7. Engineering Mechanics  -  Stephan Timoshenko, D. Young (TMH)  
4. 8. Strength of Materials (Part 1)  – S P Timoshenko (CBS)  
 
Subject Code: 
HS1L001  Subject Name: English for 
Communication  L-T-P: 
3-0-2 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
English for Communication is an amalgamation of Literature, Language and  
Communication.  The Literature component of the course comprises of Prose and 
Poetry.   
Poetry :  
A selection of poetry pieces spanning from 16th  century to the Post -Modern Period in 
English, American and Indian Literature are chosen to introduce to the students to the 
different poets from different ages and countries and also to acquaint them with the 
various poetic forms like Sonnet, Ballad, Eleg y, Didactic, Dramatic, Nature, Lyric,  
Romantic, etc. The list is an indicative one . 16th century - 17th century - Geoffrey 
Chaucer, William Shakespeare, Edmund Spenser, Ben Johnson, Thomas Wyatt.  
17th century - 18th century - John Milton, John Donne, George He rbert, John Dryden, 
Oliver Goldsmith.  18th century - 19th century - Alexander  Pope, Thomas Gray, Robert 
Burns, William Blake, William Wordsworth, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Lord Byron, P.B.  
Shelley, John Keats, Robert Bridges, Robert Southey, Samuel Johnson.  19th century - 
20th century - Alfred Tennyson, Robert Browning, Walter de la Mare, Thomas Hardy, 
A.E. Housman, Rudyard Kipling, D.H. Lawrence, Wilfred Owen, D.G. Rossetti, Christina 
Rossetti, Emily Dickinson, Gerald Manley Hopkins, Charlotte Bronte, Lewis Car oll, 
Edward Fitzgerald, Walt Whitman.  20th century - Present - Ted Hughes, Louis MacNeice, 
W.B. Yeats, Stephen Spender, W.H. Auden, Nissim Ezekiel, Sarojini Naidu, Jayanta 
Mahapatra, Robert Frost, , Ezra Pound, E.E. Cummings, T.S. Eliot, Walt Whitman, A.K. 
Ramanujan, Kamala Das, Rabindranath Tagore, Jack Prelutsky,   Chinua Achebe, Maya 
Angelou, Margaret Atwood, Leonard Cohen, Louise Erdrich, Leslie Marmon Silko.  
Prose : 
A selection of fictional and non -fictional prose pieces spanning from 17th century to the 
Post-Modern Period.   Fiction and non -fictional pieces from English, American, Russian 
and Indian Literature are chosen to introduce the students to different writings from 
different ages and countries. The list is an inclusive one consisting of short storie s, 
essays, excerpts, extracts from novels, biographies and memoirs, history, travel and 
other forms.  17th century -18th century:  Charles Dickens, William Makepeace 
Thackeray, George Eliot, Thomas Hardy, Lewis Carroll, Arthur Conan Doyle, John 
Bunyan,   Rudya rd Kipling, H.G. Wells, R.L, Stevenson, Jane Austen, Emily Bronte, 
Charles Lamb, F.M. Dostoyevsky, Nikolai Gogol, Daniel Dafoe , Jonathan Swift, Lewis 
Carroll; 19th century -20th century:  Oscar Wilde, O Henry, H.H. Munro, Mark Twain, 
Somerset Maughaum, Natha niel Hawthorne, G.B. Shaw, G.K. Chesterton, Agatha 
Christie, Gerald Durrell, Will Durant, E.M. Forster, Aldous Huxley, Henry David Thoreau, 
Anton Chekov, Maxim Gorky, Leo Tolstoy, George Orwell, Rabindranath Tagore, M.K. 
Gandhi, J. Nehru, Virginia Woolf, G uy De Maupassant, Washington Irving, Margaret 
Fuller, Charles Darwin, Arthur Conan Doyle, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Ernest Hemingway, 
Edgar Allan Poe.  20th century -Present:  J.M. Coetzee, R.K. Narayan, R.K. Laxman, A.P.J. 
Abdul Kalam, Khushwant  Singh, Anita Desai, Yann Martel, Ken Kesey, Stephen King, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
9 
 Thomas King, Richard Wright, N Scott Momaday, Chetan Bhagat, J. Krishnamurthy, 
Virginia Woolf, Gerald Vizenor, Alice Walker, Chinua Achebe, Jeffrey Archer, Issac 
Asimov, Roald Dahl, J.R.R. Tolkien,  D.H. Lawrence, James Joyce, Oran Pamuk, Salman 
Rushdie, Bertrand Russell, Ruskin Bond, A.G. Gardiner, John Steinbeck.            
Communication : 
Because communication is so important in business, businesses want and need people 
with good communication skill s. Business communication is a blend of skills like writing 
and speaking well, displaying proper etiquettes and listening attentively.  
Communications through technology greatly enhances one’s ability to communicate 
effectively and articulately. For example , E-mails often result in a sender’s language 
skills being placed in front of different people simultaneously; while audio and video will 
reveal the calibre of one’s verbal and diplomatic strengths. The communication aspect 
of the English for Communication  Course includes:   
 
1. The Basics of Business Communication  
2. Importance of Listening  
3. Barriers in the Communication Process  
4. Business Letters (Letter of Inquiry, Complaint, Cover Letter)  
5. Resume Writing  
6. Memo and Memo Reports  
7. Report Writing  
8. Fax and E Mail  
 
English Laboratory : 
Objective: The laboratory component included in the course provides an ideal platform 
for students to prepare themselves into confident and self -assured individuals. The Lab 
course is designed to inculcate confidence and clarity in presentation and expression of 
thought, views and ideas through practice and exercises. It constitutes six basic 
components to improve listening, reading and writing skill of the students.   
Lessons:  
1. Pronunciation (Basic sounds of English like  Long/Short Vowels; All consonants)  
2. Stress Intonation (Rising and Falling)  
3. Speaking - Oral Presentations, Group Discussions, Story Telling, Role Plays  
4. Listening – Importance and Practice  
5. Reading - Practice  
6. Writing (Paragraph writing, good  writing and bad writing with samples, Indianism),  
Grammar (Basic - Articles, Prepositions, Verbs, Common Errors , etc)  
 
Text/Reference Books:  
1. John Seely,  The Oxford Guide to Writing and Speaking , OUP  
2. Krishna Mohan and Meenakshi Raman,  Effective English Communication ,  TMH 
3. R.W.Lesikar and John.D. Pettit,  Business Communication: Theory and 
Application ,  All India Traveller Bookseller  
4. Francis Soundaraj,  Speaking and Writing for Effective Business Communication , 
Macmillan.   
5. Herta A. Murphy, et al.,  Effective Business Communication , Tata Mc -Graw Hill: New 
Delhi  
6. Ronald B. Adler and George Rodman,   Understanding Human Communication , 
Oxford University Press:   New York  
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
10 
 Subject Code: HS1L002  Subject Name: Learning 
English  L-T-P:  
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
The Learning English Course is designed to improve the English Listening, Speaking, 
Reading and Speaking skills of students.  
I. Prose  
A selection of fictional and non -fictional prose pieces spanning from 17th century to 
the Post -Modern Period.   Fiction and non -fictional pieces from English, American, 
Russian and Indian Literature are chosen to introduce the students to different 
writings from different ages and countries. The list is an inclusive one consisting of 
short s tories, essays, excerpts, extracts from novels, biographies and memoirs, 
history, travel and other forms.   
17th century - 18th century - Charles Dickens, William Makepeace Thackeray, 
George Eliot, Thomas Hardy, Lewis Carroll, Arthur Conan Doyle, John 
Bunyan,   Rudyard Kipling, H.G. Wells, R.L, Stevenson, Jane Austen, Emily Bronte, 
Charles Lamb, F.M. Dostoyevsky, Nikolai Gogol, Daniel Dafoe, Jonathan Swift, Lewis 
Carroll.  
19th century - 20th century - Oscar Wilde, O Henry, H.H. Munro, Mark Twain, 
Somerset Maughau m, Nathaniel Hawthorne, G.B. Shaw, G.K. Chesterton, Agatha 
Christie, Gerald Durrell, Will Durant, E.M. Forster, Aldous Huxley, Henry David 
Thoreau, Anton Chekov, Maxim Gorky, Leo Tolstoy, George Orwell, Rabindranath 
Tagore, M.K. Gandhi, J. Nehru, Virginia Woolf, Guy De Maupassant, Washington 
Irving, Margaret Fuller, Charles Darwin, Arthur Conan Doyle, F. Scott Fitzgerald, 
Ernest Hemingway, Edgar Allan Poe.  
20th century - Present - J.M. Coetzee, R.K. Narayan, R.K. Laxman, A.P.J. Abdul 
Kalam, Khushwant Singh, A nita Desai, Yann Martel, Ken Kesey, Stephen King, Thomas 
King, Richard Wright, N Scott Momaday, Chetan Bhagat, J. Krishnamurthy, Virginia 
Woolf, Gerald Vizenor, Alice Walker, Chinua Achebe, Jeffrey Archer, Issac Asimov, 
Roald Dahl, J.R.R. Tolkien, D.H. Law rence, James Joyce, Oran Pamuk, Salman 
Rushdie, Bertrand Russell, Ruskin Bond, A.G. Gardiner, John Steinbeck.  
II. Writing - Paragraph, Essay, Précis, Dictation, Comprehension, Letter Writing  
III. English Tutorial - Practice Listening and Speaking English   
IV. English Practice - Grammar Assignments and Workbook (Everyday English Level 
I/II) 
 
Text/Reference Books:  
1. John Seely,  The Oxford Guide to Writing and Speaking , OUP  
2. Krishna Mohan and Meenakshi Raman , Effective English Communication ,  TMH 
3. R.W.Lesikar and John.D. Pettit,  Business Communication: Theory and 
Application ,  All India Traveller Bookseller  
4. Francis Soundaraj,  Speaking and Writing for Effective Business Communication , 
Macmillan.  
5. Herta A. Murphy, et al.,  Effective Business Commu nication , Tata Mc -Graw Hill: New 
Delhi 
1. 6. Ronald B. Adler and George Rodman,   Understanding Human Communication , 
Oxford University Press:   New York   
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
11 
 Subject Code: 
EE1L001  Subject Name: Electrical 
Technology  L-T-P:  
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
Introduction: Sources of energy; General structure of electrical power systems, Power 
transmission and distribution via overhead lines and underground cables, Steam, 
Hydel, and Nuclear power generation; DC Networks: Kirchhoff’s laws, node voltage 
and mesh current methods, Delta -star and star -delta conversion, Superposition 
principle, Thevenin’s, Norton’s theorems and Maximum power transfer theorem; 
Single phase AC Circuits: Single phase EMF generation, average and effective values 
of sinusoids, solution of R,L,C series circuits, the j operator, complex representation of 
impedances, phasor diagram, power factor, power in complex notation, solution of 
parallel and series – parallel circuits; Three phase AC Circuits: Three phase EMF 
generation, delta and Y – connections, line and phase quantities, solution of three 
phase circuits, balanced supply voltage and balanced load, phasor diagram, 
measurement of power in three phase circuits, Three phase four wire circuits; 
Magnetic Circuits: Ampere’s circuital law, B – H curve, solution of magnetic circuits, 
hysteresis and eddy current losses; Transformers: Construction, EMF equation, 
ratings, phasor diagram on no load and full load, equivalent circuit, regulation and 
efficiency calculations, open and short circuit tests , auto -transformers; DC Machines: 
Construction, EMF and Torque equations, Characteristics of DC generators and 
motors, speed control of DC motors and DC motor starters; Electrical Measuring 
Instruments: DC PMMC instruments, shunt and multipliers, multimete rs, Moving iron 
ammeters and voltmeters, dynamometer, wattmeter, AC watthour meter, extension of 
instrument ranges.   
 
Text/Reference Books:  
1. 1. E. Hughes , “Electrical Technology,”  Pearson Education, 2010.  
2. 2. V. Del Toro,  “Electrical Engg Fundamentals,”  PHI Learning, 2009.  
3. 3. I. J. Nagrath and D. P. Kothari, ‘ Basic Electrical Engineering’  TATA Mc Graw Hill 
Education, 2009.  
4. 4. D. A. Bell,  “Electric Circuits,”  7th Ed., Oxford Higher Education, 2009.  
 
Subject Code: 
CS1L001  Name: Introduction to 
Programming and Data Structure  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
Digital computer fundamentals, concepts of algorithms and introduction to 
programming – examples; Constants and variables – data types, operators and 
expressions - type conversions, types of expressions; Assignment statements, input -
output statements - concepts of data formats; Control statements: branching – if-else 
statements; iteration – while, do -while, for statements. nested control structures, 
switch, break and continue statements; Funct ions and recursion – examples; concepts 
of parameter passing by values and by reference; Arrays – single and 
multidimensional, examples – searching and sorting; Introduction to pointers, 
character strings and arrays, pointers and arrays; Structures, linked  lists, dynamic 
allocation, stacks and queues, binary trees and tree traversals; Data files – creating, 
opening, closing and operating data files; (The programming language C to be used as 
the basis language).  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
12 
 Text Books:  
1. 1. B. Gottfried, “ Schaum’ s   Programming with C ,” Tata McGraw -Hill. 
2. 2. E. Balaguruswamy, “ Programming in ANSI C ,” Tata McGraw -Hill. 
3. 3. Y.  Kanetkar, “ Let us C ,” BPB Publications.  
4. 4. S. Lipschutz, “ Data Structures, Schaum’s Outlines Series ,” Tata McGraw -Hill. 
Reference Books:  
1. 1. Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis M. Ritchie, “ The C Programming Language ,” 
Prentice Hall of India.  
2. 2. Ellis Horowitz, Satraj Sahni and Susan Anderson -Freed, “ Fundamentals of Data 
Structures in C ,” W. H. Freeman and Company.  
 
Subject Code: 
ME1P001  Name: Introduction to 
Manufacturing Processes  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit: 2  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
Machining:  
 Introducing to various machine tools and demonstration on machining  
 Making a steel pin as per drawing by machining in centre lathe  
 External screw thread on lathe  
 Making a cast iron Vee block by shaping  
 Making a regular polygon prism (MS)/ hexagon by milling machine  
 Slot fitting by milling machine  
 Study of machining in machining in machining centre (CNC)  
 Study of Electro discharge machining (EDM)  
Foundry Practice:     
 Orientation, demonstration and practice on metal casting  
 Practicing sand moulding using split and uneven parting line pattern  
 Practice on CO2 moulding and machine moulding  
 Mechanised sand preparation and melting practice  
Welding Practice:  
 Practice on el ectric arc welding  
 Practice on oxy -acetylene gas welding  
 Introduction and demonstration on submerged arc welding  
Metal Forming:   
Demonstration of deep drawing and other forming process   
 
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Chapman W.A.J.,  Workshop Technology - Part I , CBS Publishers.  
2. Chapman W.A.J.,  Workshop Technology - Part II , CBS Publishers.  
3. Hajra Choudhury S.K.,  Elements of workshop Technology Vol. I , Media Promoters.  
4. Hajra Choudhury S.K.,  Elements of workshop Technology Vol. II , Media Promoters.  
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
13 
 Subject Code:   CE1P001  Subject Name: Engineering 
Drawing  and Graphics  L-T-P: 
1-0-3 Credit: 3  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
Introduction to IS code of drawing; Conics and Engineering Curves – ellipse, parabola, 
hyperbola, cycloid, trochoid, involute; Projection of lines – traces, true length; Projection 
of planes and solids; sold objects – cube, prism, pyramid, cylinder, cone and sphere; 
Projection on Auxiliary planes; Isometric projection, isometric scale; Section of solids – 
true shape of section; Introduction to CAD tools – basics; Introduction of Development 
and Intersection of surfaces.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. Bhatt N.D. Elementary Engineering Drawing , Charotar Publishing House.  
2. Gill P.S. Engineering Drawing & Engg. Graphics , S. K. Kataria & Sons.  
3. Lakshminarayan  L.V.  and Vaish R.S. Engineering Graphics , Jain Brothers.  
Subject 
Code:   PH1P001  Subject Name:   Physics 
Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit: 2  
Pre-Requisite(s): Nil  
1. To determine the damping constant of the pendulum for different eddy damping current.  
2. To verify Malus’s Law of polarization of light.  
3. To determine the wave length of the prominent lines of mercury source by a plane 
transmission diffraction grating and to calculate the resolving power and dispersive power 
of the grating.  
4. To study the intensity distribution of Fraunhofer diffraction pattern by a single slit and 
measure the width of the slit for a given wavelength of laser light.  
5. To determine the wavelength of the given source using the Michelson interferometer.  
6. To determine the wave length of the  given source using Fresnel’s biprism.  
7. To find out the resonance and beat time period of the coupled pendulum and find out the 
spring constant.  
8. To study the interference pattern and determine the radius of curvature of the plano 
convex lens using Newton’s rings apparatus.  
Text/Reference Books:  
1. 1. Ghatak  A. Optics , McGraw -Hill. 
2. 2. Pain H. J.  The Physics of Vibrations and Waves , Wiley.  
 
Subject Code: 
CY1P001  Subject Name: Chemistry 
Laboratory  L-T-P: 0-
0-3 Credit: 2  
Prerequisite(s): Nil  
Experiment -1: Determination of the surface tension and parachor of a homologous 
series.  
Experiment -2: Measurement of the coefficient of viscosity of ethanol & ethanol -water 
system.  
Experiment -3: Studies on acid -base conductometric titration.  
Experiment - 4: Studies on PH metric titration of strong base with strong acid.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
14 
 Experiment -5: Estimation of sulphate ion in tap water by nepheloturbidimetric 
analysis.  
Experiment - 6: Spectrophotometric determination of acid dissociation constant (pka) 
of methyl red (MR) an acid base indicator.  
Experiment -7: Determination of solubility and solubility product of a sparingly soluble 
salt at room temperature by conductometric method.  
Experiment - 8: Potentiometric titration of a given sodium carbonate solution with 
aques ous hydrochloric acid solution.  
Experiment -9:  kinetics of ester hydrolysis.  
Experiment -10: Detection of functional groups in an organic compound for solid 
sample.  
Experiment -11:  Detection of functional groups in an organic compound for liquid 
sample.  
Experiment -12: Thin layer chromatography (TLC).  
 
Text/Reference Books:  
1. 1. Nad, A. K.; Mahapatra, B. and Ghoshal A.  An advanced course in practical 
chemistry , New Central Book Agency (P) Ltd.  
2. 2. Elias A. J.  A collection of general chemistry experiments , University Press.  
3. 3. Maity S. and Ghosh N.  Physical Chemistry Practical , New Central Book Agency (P) 
Ltd. 
 
Subject Code: 
EE1P001  Subject Name: Electrical 
Technology Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credits: 2  
Prerequisite(s): Electrical Technology  
Experiments as per the topics in the syllabus for the course `Electrical Technology’ 
(EE1L001) will be conducted in the laboratory class.  
Text Books:  
1. E. Hughes,  “Electrical Technology,”  Pearson Education, 2010.  
2. V. Del Toro, “Electrical Engg  Fundamentals,” PHI Learning, 2009.  
Reference Books:  
1. 1. I. J. Nagrath and D. P. Kothari, ‘ Basic Electrical Engineering’  TATA McGraw Hill 
Education, 2009.  
2. 2. D. A. Bell,  “Electric Circuits,”  7th Ed., Oxford Higher Education, 2009.  
 
Subject Code: 
CS1P001  Subject Name: Introduction to 
Programming and Data Structures 
Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credit: 2  
Prerequisite(s): Introduction to Programing and Data Structures  
Familiarization of a computer and the environment; Execution of sample programs 
related to Expression evaluation, Conditionals and branching, Iteration, Functions, 
Recursion, Tail -recursion, Arrays, String manipulation, Structures, Linked lists, 
Doubly -linked lists and Binary Trees. Execution of programs involving abstract data 
types like Stacks  and Queues.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
15 
 Semester -II 
Subject Code:   MA1L002  Subject Name: 
Mathematics -II L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credit: 4  
Pre-requisite(s): Nil  
Linear Algebra:  Vector spaces, subspaces, span,   Linear dependence, independence 
of vectors, basis, dimension,   linear transformations, range, kernel, rank, nullity of 
linear transformation, space of all linear transformations, Operator equations, matrix 
associated with a linear map, linear map associated with a matrix, elementary row 
operations, solution of algebraic equa tions, consistency conditions. Matrix inversion by 
row operations, Eigenvalues and eigenvectors, Hermitian and skew Hermitian 
matrices, orthogonal and unitary matrices, application to reduction of quadrics.   
Complex Analysis:  Limit, continuity, differentia bility and analyticity of functions 
Cauchy -Riemann equations (cartesian and polar), Harmonic functions,   Elementary 
complex functions, Line integrals, upper bounds for moduli of contour integrals, 
Cauchy’s integral theorem, Cauchy’s integral formula, deriv atives of analytic functions, 
Power series, Taylor’s series, Laurent’s series, Zeros and singularities, Residue 
theorem, evaluation of improper integrals by residue theorem.   
 
Text books:  
1.   Strang G.  Linear Algebra and its applications, Cengage Learning  
2.   Churchill R.V. and Brown J.W.  Complex Variables and Applications , Mc-Graw Hill  
3.   Kreyszig E.  Advanced Engineering Mathematics , John Wiley & Sons   
 
Reference Books:  
J1. ain  R. K. and Iyengar S. R. K.  Advanced Engineering Mathematics , Narosa  
1. 2. Krishnamurthy V., Mainra V. P. and Arora J.L.   An Introduction to Linear Algebra , 
Affiliated East -West Press Pvt Ltd New Delhi  
2. 3. Axler S.  Linear Algebra Done Right , UTM, Springer  
3. 4. Poole D.  Linear Algebra : A Modern Introduction , Brooks/Cole  
 
All other courses are same as Semester -I Courses.  
  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
16 
 B. Tech in Electrical Engineering (3rd Semester – 8th Semester Courses)  
SEMESTER – III 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Breadth – 1  3-0-0 3 3  
Introduction to Electronics  EC2L001  3-1-0 4 4 19 
Introduction to Material Science and 
Engineering  ID2L001  2-0-0 2 2  
Introduction to Bio Science and Technology  ID2L002  2-0-0 2 2  
Probability Statistics and Stochastic 
Processes  MA2L003  3-1-0 4 4  
Signals and Systems  EC2L002  3-1-0 4 4 19 
Introduction to Electronics Laboratory  EC2P001  0-0-3 2 3 20 
Signals and Systems Laboratory  EC2P002  0-0-3 2 3 20 
Seminar  EE2S001  0-0-3 2 0  
  Total  25 25  
 
SEMESTER – IV 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Lateral -1  3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 3/4  
Breadth – 2  3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 3/4  
Environmental Science Technology and 
Management  ID2L003  2-0-0 2 2  
Network Theory  EE2L001  3-1-0 4 4 21 
Electric Machines  EE2L003  3-1-0 4 4 21 
Digital Electronics and Microprocessor  EC2L006  3-1-0 4 4 22 
Electric Machines Laboratory  EE2P00 1 0-0-3 2 3 22 
Digital Electronics and Microprocessor 
Laboratory  EC2P006  0-0-3 2 3 23 
  Total  24/25  26/27   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
17 
 SEMESTER – V 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Lateral - 2  3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 3/4  
Breadth - 3  3-0-0 3 3  
Power Electronics  EE3L004  3-1-0 4 4 24 
Electrical Power Transmission and 
Distribution  EE3L007  3-1-0 4 4 24-25 
Measurement and Instrumentation  EE3L010  3-0-0 3 3 25-26 
Electromagnetic Field Theory  EE3L011  3-0-0 3 3 26 
Power Electronics  Laboratory  EE3P004  0-0-3 2 3 26 
Measurement and Instrumentation 
Laboratory  EE3P005  0-0-3 2 3 27 
  Total  24/25  26/27   
 
SEMESTER – VI 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Lateral -3  3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 3/4  
Breadth – 4  3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 3/4  
Control Systems  EE3L003  3-1-0 4 4 28 
Digital Signal Processing  EC3L003  3-1-0 4 4 28-29 
Power System Operation and Control  EE3L012  3-1-0 4 4 29 
Control Systems Laboratory  EE3P003  0-0-3 2 3 30 
Digital Signal Processing Laboratory  EC3P002  0-0-3 2 3 30 
Power Systems Laboratory  EE3P006  0-0-3 2 3 30 
  Total  24/26  27/29   
 
SEMESTER – VII  
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Digital Control Systems  EE4L005  3-0-0 3 3 31 
Renewable Energy Systems  EE4L006  3-0-0 3 3 31-32 
Elective – 1  3-0-0 3 3  
Elective – 2  3-0-0 3 3  
Industrial Training  Defence  EE4T001   2 2  
Project - Part 1  EE4D001  0-0-6 4 0  
  Total  18 14  
SEMESTER – VIII  
Elective – 3  3-0-0 3 3  
Elective – 4  3-0-0 3 3  
Elective – 5  3-0-0 3 3  
Elective – 6  3-0-0 3 3  
Renewable Energy Systems Laboratory  EE4P002  0-0-3 2 3 33 
Project - Part 2  EE4D002  0-0-9 6 0  
  Total  20 15  
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
18 
 List of Elective Courses  
Subject Name  Subject Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus 
Page No. 
Elective – 1, 2  
Semiconductor Devices  EC4L001  3-0-0 3 3 34 
Statistical Signal Processing  EC6L005  3-0-0 3 3 34-35 
High Voltage Engineering  EE6L009  3-0-0 3 3 35 
Energy Storage Systems  EE6L011  3-0-0 3 3 35 
Opto -Electronics  EC4L002  3-0-0 3 3 36 
Image and Video Processing  EC6L002  3-1-0 4 4 36 
Electric Power Quality  EE6L002  3-0-0 3 3 36-37 
Advanced Power Electronics  EE6L010  3-0-0 3 3 37 
Industrial Instrumentation  EE6L007  3-0-0 3 3 37-38 
Elective – 3, 4, 5, 6   
Biomedical Signal Processing  EC6L015  3-0-0 3 3 39 
Fiber Optic Sensors  EC6L019  3-0-0 3 3 39 
Embedded Systems  EC4L008  3-0-0 3 3 39-40 
Pattern Recognition  EC6L027  3-0-0 3 3 40 
Array Signal Processing  EC6L024  3-0-0 3 3 40-41 
Power System Dynamics & Control  EE6L003  4-0-0 4 4 41 
Power System Protection  EE6L004  4-0-0 4 4 41 
Distribution System Engineering  EE6L017  3-0-0 3 3 42 
Information Theory and Coding  EC6L003  3-0-0 3 3 42-43 
Computational Electromagnetics  EC6L016  3-0-0 3 3 43 
Adaptive Signal Processing  EC6L023  3-0-0 3 3 43 
HVDC and Flexible AC Transmission Systems  EE6L005  3-0-0 3 3 44 
Smart Grid Technology  EE6L014  3-0-0 3 3 44 
Advanced Digital Signal Processing  EC6L004  3-0-0 3 3 45 
Semiconductor Device Modelling  EC6L017  3-0-0 3 3 45 
Advanced High Voltage Engg.  EE6L015  3-0-0 3 3 46 
Advanced Electric Machines  EE4L004  3-0-0 3 3 46-47 
Electric Drives  EE4L003  3-0-0 3 3 47 
Power System Planning  EE6L018  3-0-0 3 3 47-48 
 
The syllabus for Lateral and Breadth Courses are available in the syllabus 
document  of the Schools offering the courses . 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
19 
 Syllabus for Core Courses for B.Tech Program (School of Electrical Sciences ) 
SEMESTER – III 
Subject Code: 
EC2L001  Name: Introduction to Electronics  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credits: 4  
Prerequisite: None  
Introduction to Electronic Devices: passive devices, Diode, bipolar junction transistor (BJT), 
metal oxide semiconductor field -effect transistor (MOSFET); Diode: basic structure and types, 
operating principle, current -voltage characteristic, large and smal l signal models; Diode 
Applications: rectifier circuits, zener voltage regulator Regards, clipper and clamper circuits; BJT 
and their Application: structure and modes of operation; NPN and PNP transistor in active mode, 
DC analysis, BJT as a switch and amp lifier, small signal  
equivalent circuits, single stage CE amplifier; MOSFET and Applications: switch and amplifier; 
Operational Amplifier and applications: Basics, summing amplifier, inverting and non -inverting 
configuration, voltage follower, differentiat or and integrator; Feedback: Basic concepts of 
feedback, ideal feedback topologies; Oscillators: Basic principle of sinusoidal oscillation, phase -
shift oscillator, wien -bridge oscillator; Digital Electronics: Boolean algebra and rules of 
simplification and  combinational circuits.  
Text Books:  
1. S. Sedra, K. C. Smith, “Microelectronic Circuits,” Oxford University Press, India, 2005.  
2. A Malvino, D J Bates; “Electronic Principles,” Tata McGraw Hill, India, 2007.  
Reference Books:  
1. R C Jaeger, T N Blalock, Microelectronic Circuit Design; Tata McGraw Hill, India, 2006.  
Subject Code: 
EC2L002  Name: Signals and Systems  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credits: 4  
Prerequisite:  Mathematics – 1 
Objective and overview, signal and system types and classifications, LTI system: Causality, 
stability, step response, impulse response and convolution integral; Periodic signal analysis: 
Fourier series and properties; Aperiodic signal analysis : Fourier Tr ansform - its properties and 
sinusoidal steady state analysis of systems; Discrete -time Fourier transform; Fourier transform 
for periodic signals; Time and frequency characterization of signals and systems: magnitude -
phase representation of Fourier transfo rms; Unilateral and Bilateral Laplace Transforms and 
properties: Analysis and characterization of LTI systems using Laplace transform; System 
function and block diagram representation, Bode plot; Discrete signals: Sampling, digitization 
and reconstruction of analog signals; Fourier transform of discrete signals: DFT, z -transforms; 
Discrete systems, transfer functions and convolution;  Analog filter design: Butterworth, Sallen 
Key, frequency transformation and scaling. Text Books:  
1. A. V. Oppenheim, A. S. Wills ky and S. H. Nawab, “Signals and Systems,” 2nd Ed., Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008.  
2. S. Haykin and B. V. Veen, “Signals and Systems,” 2nd Ed., Wiley India, 2007.  
Reference Books:  
1. H. P. Hsu, “Signals and Systems – Schaum’s Outline Series,” McGraw Hill, 1995.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
20 
 Subject Code: 
EC2P001  Name: Introduction to Electronics Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credits: 2  
Prerequisite: Introduction to Electronics  
Familiarization with electronic components; Familiarization and usage with oscilloscope, signal 
generator, multimeter ; Frequency -response of R -C, C-R and R -L networks; Square -wave testing, 
V-I characteristics of PN junction diode and zener diode; Voltage Rectifiers; Common -Emitter 
amplifiers; Analog circuits using OP -AMP; logic gates.  
Subject Code: 
EC2P002  Name: Signals  and Systems Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credits: 2  
Prerequisite: Signals and Systems  
Basic MATLAB Programming: Manipulation of Vectors, Arrays and Matrices, Arithmetic Operations, 
Logical Operations, Loops, M -files & Functions, Mathematical Functions; Graphics and 3 -D Visualization: 
Plotting of One -dimensional and Two -dimensional Signals, Plotting Symbolic Functions, 3 -D Plotting; 
Mathematical Functions: Finding Roots of Polynomials, Computing Integration and Differentiation, 
Solving Differential and Di fference Equations, Polynomial Curve Fitting, Recording, Storing, Reading, and 
M-File; Functions: Recording and Playing Signals, Storing and Reading Data in Different Formats, Creating 
M-Functions for Generating Different Elementary Signals, Creating M -Functions for Computing Different 
Statistical Parameters; Analysis of Systems: Finding Convolution, Finding Laplace and Inverse Laplace 
Transforms, Finding Z -and Inverse -Z Transforms, Zero -Pole Analysis; Analysis of Signals and Systems: 
Sampling of Signals, F ourier Series of Signals, Finding Magnitude and Phase Spectrum of Signals, 
Frequency Response of System; Convolution and Filtering, Creating GUI in MAT LAB, MATLAB Simulink 
Modelling.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
21 
 SEMESTER – IV 
Subject Code: 
EE2L001  Name: Network Theory  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credits: 4  
Prerequisite: Signals and Systems  
Nodal and Loop Analysis: review, modified nodal analysis; Network Theorems: Substitution 
theorem, Compensation theorem, Reciprocity theorem, Maximum power transfer theorem, 
Millman’s theorem, Tellegen’s theorem; Transient analysis of RLC circuit and higher order 
circuits; Frequency domain analysis of dynamic circuits using Fourier series, Fourier transforms 
and Laplace transforms;  Network functions: poles and zeros, driving point and transfer 
functions, restrictions on poles and zeros for network functions, time domain behaviour, 
frequency response plots; Two -port networks and passive filters: z -parameters, y -parameters, 
h-parameters, and ABCD parameters; reciprocity and symmetry in two -port ne tworks; 
Introduction to network topology: Graph theory: Tree, Co -tree, fundamental cut -set, 
fundamental loop analysis of network; State variable analysis of networks.  
Text Books:  
1. M. E. Valkenburg, “Network Analysis,” 3rd Ed., Pearson Prentice Hall, 2006.  
2. F. F. Kuo, “Network Analysis and Synthesis,” 2nd Ed., Wiley India, 2007.  
Reference Books:  
1. W. H. Hyat, J. E. Kemmerly and S. M. Durbin, “Engineering Circuit Analysis,” 6th Edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 
2007.  
2. R. A. DeCarlo  and P -M Lin, “Linear Circuit Analysis,” 2nd Ed., Oxford University Press, 2007.  
Subject Code: 
EE2L003 Name: Electric Machines  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credits: 4  
Prerequisite: Electrical Technology  
Production of rotating magnetic field with proof, Magneto motive force and flux distribution on 
AC machines, Induced voltage and torque; Generator Construction, Winding configuration, 
Internal Generated Voltage, Equivalent Circuit, Phasor Diagram, Power and Torque, Losses & 
Efficiency, Regulation, Effect of Load Changes  on a Synchronous Generator operation, Parallel 
operation of AC Generators, Frequency -power and Voltage -Reactive Power characteristics, 
Parallel Operation; Equivalent Circuit, Steady state operation of synchronous motor, Power and 
torque, Torque -Speed char acteristic, Losses & Efficiency, Effect of load and field current 
changes, Different methods of starting; Induction Motor Construction, Basic Induction Motor 
Concepts, Torque and Power in Induction Motor,  Torque -Speed Characteristics, Equivalent 
Circuit o f an Induction Motor, Losses & Efficiency, Starting, Tests;  Construction and operation 
of 3-phase transformer, Different configurations including Y -Y,  Y -Δ , Δ - Y and Δ - Δ, Phase Angle 
Displacement and Phase Rotation (Different Vector Group), Zigzag Conne ction, Three -Phase to 
Two -Phase conversion, Scott Connection, Autotransformer, Three winding Transformer.  
Text Books:   
1. S. J. Chapman “Electric Machinery Fundamental,” 4th Ed., MG Hill International Edition, 2006.  
2. A. E.  Fitzgerald, C. Kingsley, Jr, and S. D. Umans, “Electric Machinery,” 6th Ed., Mc Graw Hill International 
Edition, 2002.  
3. P.S Bimbhra, “Generalized Theory of Electrical Machines,” Khana Publisher.  
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
22 
 Subject Code:  
EC2L006  Name: Digital Electronics and Microprocessor  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credits: 4  
Prerequisite: Introduction to Electronics  
 
Introduction to Boolean algebra and Switching Function, Boolean minimization; Combinational 
Logic Design using MSI circuits : Full Adder / Subtractor, BCD Adder, LAC Adder,  Decoder, 
MUX/DEMUX three structure, Combinational logic design using ROM array, Applications of MSI 
designs; Integrated Circuits: Difference between combinational and sequential circuits, Flip 
Flops, Counters, Shift Registers and PLA; Analysis and Synthes is of Sequential Circuits: Basic 
models of sequential M/C, Analysis of Asynchronous and Synchronous circuits, Synthesis of 
completely and incompletely specified synchronous sequential M/Cs; Introduction to 
Microprocessor: Overview of architecture of Intel 8085 Microprocessor (Register, Stack, 
Interrupt) Instruction set and programming; Introduction to 16 Bit Microprocessor : Architecture 
of 8086 CPU architecture, Internal operations, Machine Language instructions, Addressing 
mode, Instruction Format, Instru ction executions, Addressing mode, Instruction Format, 
Instruction execution timing, comparison of 8088 with 8086; Assembly language programming 
and Instructions: Assembler instruction format, Data Transfer, Arithmetic, Branch, Flag 
manipulation, Logical, Shift and Rotate. String Manipulation Stack Manipulation, all and return 
instructions, REP Prefix, segment override prefix, and simple assembler directives such as real, 
variable, DB, DW, DD, EQU, END, Assume, pointer (byte, word, double word, Near, Short,  and 
Far).  
Text Books:  
1. S. Lee, “Digital Circuits and Logic Design” Prentice Hall India.  
2. D. P. Leach, A. P. Malvino and G. Saha, “Digital Principles and Applications,” Tata McGraw Hill.  
3. M. Morris Mano, “Digital Logic and Computer Design,” Prentice Hall.  
Reference Books:  
1. B. N Jain and R. P. Jain, Modern Digital Electronics, Tata McGraw Hill, 2006.  
2. B. B. Bray, The Intel Microprocessors - 8086/8088, 80186, 80286, 80386, and 80486 -Architecture, 
Programming and Interfacing, Prentice Hall, 2000.  
3. D. V. Hall, Micr oprocessor and Interfacing programming & Hardware, TMH, 2001.  
4. A. K. Ray and K. M. Bhurchandi, Advanced Microprocessors & Peripherals: Architecture, Programming & 
Interfacing, TMH, 2008.  
 
Subject Code:  
EE2P001  Name: Electric Machines Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credits: 2  
Prerequisite: Electric Machines  
 
Performance testing (regulation, efficiency) ,  characteristics (no -load and load characteristics) 
and parameters (equivalent circuit parameters, sequence components) of 3 -phase alternator, 
performance test and characteristics of 3 -phase synchronous motor, 3 -phase induction motor, 
1-phase induction motor, performance, characteristics and parameters of 1 -phase and 3 -phase 
transformers,  type of connections of transformers, synchronization of alternators.  
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
23 
 Subject Code: 
EC2P00 6 Name: Digital Electronics and Microprocessor 
Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credits: 2  
Prerequisite: Digital Electronics Circuit  
Truth tables of Logic gates; Half Adder and Full Adder; Multiplexer and De -multiplexer; 
Comparators; Encoders; Schmitt Trigger; Multivibrators: Astable, Monostable and Bi -stable; Flip 
Flops: S -R, J-K and D; Asynchronous and Synchronous Counters: Up -Dow n, Ripple counter, Ring 
counter, Familiarization with 8/16 bit microprocessors/microcontroller kits and  interfaces;  
Assembly and machine language  programming , interfacing basic I/O devices like  
keypad, LED display, usage of timers and USART peripherals, mu lti-port  
device access, stepper motor movement control, DC motor speed control.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
24 
 SEMESTER – V 
Subject Code: EE3L004  Name: Power Electronics  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credits: 4  
Prerequisite: Introduction to Electronics  
 
Characteristics of Power Semiconductor Devices: Power diode, power transistors (BJT, 
MOSFET,IGBT) and Thyristors (SCR, GTO, TRIAC), Gate drive circuit, Desired characteristics of 
controllable switches, Snubber circuits, Cooling and heat sinks; Rectifiers: Analysis and design of 
diode rectifier circuits and controlled rectifier circuits, Phase control, power factor, DC load 
voltage, Polyphase rectifiers, Current and voltage waveforms analysis , Applications for DC motor 
drives ; AC-AC Phase control: Static swi tch, integral cycle control, Application of AC -AC Phase 
Control, Single -phase and polyphase control circuits , Applications for AC motor drives ; DC-DC 
Converters: Chopper circuits using  GTOs , buck, boost and buck -boost chopper, Discontinuous 
current analy sis, Non -ideal effects and dynamic performance , Applications for DC motor drives ; 
Inverters: Split source, half -bridge inverters, full bridge inverters, Output control, polyphase 
inverters, power factor, Current and voltage waveforms analysis, Applications  for AC motor 
drives, Pulse Width Modulation (PWM): Types of PWM, Microprocessor control, Harmonics and 
reactive power; Power Supply Applications: Switching power supplies, Electrical isolation, 
Protection circuits, Power supply specifications, Power line disturbances, Power conditioners, 
Uninterruptible power supplies.  
Text Books:  
1. Muhammad H. Rashid, “Power Electronics: Circuits, Device and Applications”, 2nd Ed. 1993, Prentice -Hall, 
Inc. 
2. Ned Mohan, T M Undeland, W P Robbins, “Power Electronics: Converters, Application and Design”, John 
Wiley, 3rd Edition, 2003  
3. Thedore Wildi , “Electrical Machines, Drives and Power System”, Prentice Hall International, Inc, 1997  
 
Subject Code: EE3L007  Name: Electrical Power Transmission and 
Distribution  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credits: 4  
Prerequisite: Electrical Technology, Network Theory  
 
Power System Network: Basic structure of power system, Transmission voltages, Bundled 
conductors, Choice of economics voltages, Transmission of Network in India; Line Parameters: 
Line resistance, Inductance, Flux Linkages within the conductor producing the  flux, Flux linkage 
outside the conductor producing the flux, Inductance of bundled conductor lines, capacitance 
of two wire line, Capacitance of three phase line with equilateral spacing, Capacitance of three 
phase line with Unsymmetrical spacing, Capacit ance of bundled conductor of lines, Double 
circuit three phase lines; Performance of Transmission Lines: Representation of lines, Per unit 
method, Short transmission line, Medium length transmission line, Long transmission line, 
Evaluation of ABCD paramete rs, Equivalent and T circuits, Application of Matrix methods, Line 
voltage regulation and compensation, Regulating transformer; Overhead Line Insulators: 
Insulator materials, Types of insulators, voltage distribution over insulator string, Improvement Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
25 
 of string efficiency, Insulator failure, testing of insulators; Mechanical Design of Overhead Lines: 
General consideration, Line supports, Span conductor configuration, spacing and clearances, sag 
and tension calculations, Conductor vibration; Corona: The phen omenon of corona, Corona loss, 
Factors and conditions affecting coronal loss, Coronal in bundled conductor lines; Interference 
between Power and Communication Lines: Electromagnetic Induction, Electro Static induction, 
Reduction of interference; Undergroun d Cables: Classification of cables, Pressurized cables, 
Effective conductor register, conductor inductive reactance, parameters of single core cables, 
Capacitance of three core belted cable; Power System Transients : Circuit closing transient, 
Sudden symme trical short circuit of alternator, Recovery transient due to removal of short 
circuit, Travelling waves on transmission lines, Wave equations, Arcing grounds, Line design 
based on direct strokes, Surge arrestors Insulation coordination; Extra High Voltage  
Transmission: Need for EHV transmission, Use of bundled conductors, Radio noise from EHV 
lines, Shunt compensation static -var systems, Series compensation, EHV systems in India; 
Distribution: Comparison of various distribution systems, voltage drop in dis tribution, Kelvin’s 
Law, General design consideration, Load estimation; Design of Transmission Lines: Choice of 
voltage, Selection of conductor size, Choice of span, number of circuit, conductor, configuration; 
Power System Earthing.  
Text Books:  
1. C. L. Wadh wa, Electrical Power Systems, New Age . 
2. L. M. Faulkenberry and W. Coffer, Electrical Power Distribution and Transmission, PHI, 1996.  
3. W. D. Stevenson, Elements of Power System analysis, McGraw Hill, 1982.    
 
Subject Code: EE3L010  Name: Measurement and Instrumentation  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Introduction to Electronics  
 
Measurement of Electrical Quantities Standards of Measurement & Errors, Voltmeter, 
Ammeter, Multimeter Wattmeter and Energy meter; Measurement of Electrical Elements : 
Measurement of low, medium and high resistances, insulation resistance measurement AC 
bridges for inductance and capacitance measurement; Instrument Transformers Current and 
Potential transformers, ratio and phase angle errors; Electronic Measurements: Electronic 
voltmeter, multimeter, wattmeter & energy meter. Time, Frequency and phase angle 
measurements using CRO; Spectrum & Wave analyzer.; Digital counter, frequency meter, 
voltmeter, multimeter and storage oscilloscope; Instrumentation: Transducers, clas sification & 
selection of transducers, strain gauges, inductive & capacitive transducers, piezoelectric and 
Hall-effect transducers, thermisters, thermocouples, photo -diodes & photo -transistors, encoder 
type digital transducers, Signal conditioning and tel emetry, basic concepts of smart sensors and 
applications. Data Acquisition Systems.  
Text Books:  
1. A. K. Sawhney , “Electronics Measurements & Instrumentation,” Dhanpat Rai & Co., 2012.  
2. A. D. Helfrick and W. D. Cooper , “Modern Electronic Instrumentation and Measurement Techniques,” PHI 
Learning, 2011.  
3. A. S. Morris , R. Langari and Butterworth -Heinemannm,, “Measurement and Instrumentation: Theory and 
Appli cation,” 1st Ed., Butterworth -Heinemann Ltd, USA, 2011.   Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
26 
 4. H. M. Berlin  and F. C. Getz , “Principle of Electronics Instrumentation and Measurement,”  Prentice Hall 
College Div., 1988.  
5. E.W. Golding and F.C. Widdis, “Electrical Measurements and Measuring Instruments,” Reem Publications, 
2011.  
Subject Code: EE3L011  Name: Electromagnetic Field Theory  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Mathematics – 1, Mathematics – 2 
 
Review of Electrostatic &  Electromagnetics, Maxwell’s equations, Boundary conditions in 
Electromagnetic Field, Energy Theorems and Pointing Vector, Electromagnetic Wave Equation 
in Dielectrics and Conductors, Solution of Wave equation in Cartesian Coordinates in 
homogeneous Dissip ative and Non dissipative Regions, Waves at interface between conductors 
and Dielectrics; Transmission Lines: Introduction, Line Transmission Theory, Variation of Voltage 
and Current at distance x from the sending end, Primary Line Constant, Phase Velocity  and Line 
wavelength, Characteristics impedance, The Propagation Coefficient, Computation of Primary 
constants from values of short circuit and open circuit impedances, Phase and Group velocities, 
Standing Waves, Lossless Lines at Radio Frequencies, Voltag e Standing Wave Ratio, Reflection 
Coefficient, Transmission Lines as Circuit Elements, Smith Chart, Solution of problems using 
Smith Chart, Stub Matching; Wave Guides: Introduction, Physical Mechanism of Wave Guide 
Propagation, Phase and Group Velocities, Rectangular Wave Guides, Cut off in a Rectangular 
Wave Guide, Wave Guide dimension, Wave Guide Impedance; Antennas: Introduction, Antenna 
Equivalent Circuits, Coordinate System, Radiation Fields, Polarization, The Isotropic Radiator, 
Power Gain of an Anten na, Effective Area of an Antenna, The Hertzian Dipole, Half Wave Dipole, 
Vertical Antennas, Folded Elements, Non -Resonant Antennas, Driven Arrays, Parasitic Arrays.     
Text Books:  
1. D. J. Griffiths, ‘Introduction to Electrodynamics’, Addison Wesley, 1999.  
2. D. K. Cheng, ‘Field and Wave Electromagnetics’, Addison Wesley, 1999.  
3. W. H. Hayt,  ‘Engineering  Electromagnetic’,   Fifth  Edition.  TMH,  1999.  
4. N. N. Rao,  ‘Elements  of Engineering  Electromagnetics’,  Pearson  Education,  Inc, 2004.  
 
Subject Code: EE3P004  Name: Power Electronics  Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credits: 2  
Prerequisite: Power Electronics  
Study the operation of controlled single phase bridge converter with different types of loads; 
Study the operation of single phase AC voltage regulator with different types of loads; Study the 
operation of a three -phase bridge rectifier; Study   the workin g of a three phase sinusoidal PWM 
Inverter; Study the load voltage waveforms of first quadrant chopper and verify calculated 
output voltage with measured value with R Load; Verification of the output waveforms of single 
phase cyclo converter with R Load; C ontrolling of the speed of induction motor by Variable 
Voltage and Variable Frequency (VVVF) method; Controlling of the speed of a DC Shunt Motor 
by using single Quadrant Chopper; Controlling of the speed of a separately excited DC Motor by 
three phase con trolled convertor; Controlling of the Speed of separately excited DC Motor by 
single phase fully controlled convertor.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
27 
 Subject Code: EE3P005  Name: Measurement and Instrumentation 
Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credits: 2  
Prerequisite: Measurement and Instrumentation  
Measurement of displacement by linearly variable differential transformer (LVDT); 
Measurement of inductance by linearly variable inductive transformer (LVIT) and Maxwell 
bridge; Measurement of resistance by linearly variable resistor trans ducer (LVRT) and Kelvin 
bridge; Measurement of strain by strain gauge, Measurement of tension and compression by 
load cell module; Measurement of deflection torque by torque transducer; Measurement of 
angular position by angular potentiometer; Measurement of capacitance by Schering bridge; 
Characteristics of vibrations of a mechanical system; Study of Piezo -electric and opto -electric 
transducers; Study of flow measurement and level measurement with DP transmitter; Study of 
thermistor and RTD characteristics ; Measurements with pressure transducers and Hall effect 
transducers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
28 
 SEMESTER – VI 
Subject Code: 
EE3L003  Name: Control Systems  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Cred its: 4  
Prerequisite: Signals and Systems  
Introduction to Control Systems: Definition, Examples of control systems, Open loop and closed -
loop control systems, Review of Laplace and inverse Laplace transforms; System Modeling: 
Signal flow graph, Block diagram, Transfer function, Poles and zeros, Bl ock diagram reduction 
using signal flow graph and block diagram reduction techniques, Mechanical, electrical and 
electromechanical systems, First and second order models; Transient Response and Steady State 
Error Analysis: Definitions of transient response  parameters, analysis of second order system as 
prototype, Routh -Hurwitz stability criterion, Classification of systems based on steady state 
characteristics, Steady state error coefficients; Root Locus Method: Definition of root locus, 
Properties of root locus, Sketching of root locus, Effect of open loop poles and zeros, Root locus 
design concepts; Frequency Response Analysis: Bode diagram, Polar plot, Nichols plot, Nyquist 
stability criterion: nonmathematical description of Nyquist criterion, interpretat ion of stability, 
Relative stability – Gain and Phase margin, Closed loop frequency response – M and N contours, 
Nichols chart; Compensation Techniques: Compensation techniques: lag, lead and lag -lead 
compensation, PD, PI and PID controllers, Cascade compe nsation based on root locus method, 
Introduction to feedback compensation; State Space Analysis: Concepts of state, state variables, 
and state model, State models for linear continuous -time systems, Diagonalization, Solution of 
state equations, Concepts of  Controllability and Observability. Nonlinear Systems: Common 
physical nonlinearities, Phase plane method, Singular points, Stability of nonlinear systems, 
Phase trajectories, Describing function method and stability analysis, Lyapunov’s stability 
criterio n. 
 
Text Books:  
1. R. Stefani, B. Shahrian, C. Savant & G. Hostetter, “Design of Feedback Control Systems”, Oxford University 
Press, 2002.  
2. K. Ogata, “Modern Control Engineering”, Prentice Hall, 1997.  
Reference Books:  
1. B. C. Kuo & F. Golnaraghi, “Automatic Control Systems”, John Wiley, 2003.  
2. M. Gopal, “Control Systems: Principles and Designs”, 2nd Edition, McGraw Hill, 2002.  
3. R. C. Dorf & R. H. Bishop, “Modern Control Systems”, Prentice Hall, 2000.  
Subject Code: 
EC3L003  Name: Digital Signal Processing  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credits: 4  
Prerequisite: Signals & Systems  
Introduction to DSP, Signals and Systems Characterization, FIR and IIR : Recursive and Non 
Recursive, Z -Transform, Discrete Time Signals and Systems in Frequency Domain, Sampling, 
Quantization, Discrete F ourier Transform, Fast Fourier Transform, Short -time Fourier Transform, 
Digital Filter Structure, Analog Filter Design, Digital Filter Design.  
Text Books:  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
29 
 1. J. G. Proakis and D. G. Manolakis, “Digital Signal Processing: Principles, Algorithms and Applications, 4th 
Ed., Pearson, 2012.  
2. A. V. Oppenheim and R. W. Shafer, “Discrete -Time Signal Processing,” Prentice Hall, 2009.  
Reference Books :  
1. R. G. Lyons, “Understanding Digital Signal Processing,” 3rd Ed., Prentice Hall, 2010.  
2. V. K. Ingle and J. G. Proakis, “Digital Signal Processing using MATLAB,” Thomson Learning, 2000.  
 
Subject Code: 
EE3L012  Name: Power System Operation and Control  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credits: 4  
Prerequisite: Electrical Power Transmission and Distribution  
 
Fundamentals of Power System : Concepts of real and reactive powers, complex power, per -unit 
representation of power system, Transmission capacity, load characteristics, real power balance 
and its effect on system frequency, load frequency mechanism, react ive power, balance and its 
effect, on -load tap changing transformer and regulating transformer; Power Circle diagram: 
Receiving and sending end power circle diagram, universal power circle diagram, use of power 
circle diagram; Load flow analysis: Static lo ad flow equation for a low -bus system, characteristics 
of a load flow equation, generalization to n -bus system, Gauss -Seidel and Newton -Raphson 
method of solution of load flow equations for 2 bus and 3 bus system; Load frequency control : 
Automatic voltage , regulator, exciter modelling, generator modelling and static performances 
of AVR loop, automatic load frequency, control of single area systems, speed governing system, 
hydraulic valve actuator, turbine generator response, static performance of speed gov ernor, 
closing the ALFC loop, Concept of control area static response of primary ALFC loop, dynamic 
response of ALFC loop, ALFC for multicontrol area system, the two area system, modelling of the 
tie-line block diagram representation of two are system, sta tic response of two area system, 
dynamic response of two area system, dynamic response of two area system tie -line bias 
control, tie -line bias control of two area system, static response, steady state instabilities; 
Economic Operation of power system : Dis tribution of load between units within a plant, 
transmission loss as function of plant generation, calculation of loss -coefficient, distribution of 
loads between plants with special reference to steam and hydel plants, automatic load 
dispatching; Power sys tem stability: Steady state stability, transient stability, swing equation, 
equal area criteria for stability methods of improvement of transient stability.  
Text Books:  
1. John J. Grainger & W. D. Stevenson, Jr, “Power System Analysis”, Tata Mcgraw -Hill, 2003 Edition, 15th 
Reprint, 2010.  
2. Stephen J Chapman, “Electric Machinery and Power System Fundamentals”, Mc Graw Hill, International 
Edition, 2002.  
3. C.L Wadhwa, “Electrical  Power System”, New age  International (p) Limited Publisher, Reprint, 2008.  
4. I. J. Nagrath and D. P. Kothari, Modern Power System Analysis, TMH, 2003.  
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
30 
 Subject Code: 
EE3P00 3 Name: Control Systems Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credits: 2  
Prerequisite: Control Systems  
Transfer function evaluation of a DC motor; Study of an AC servomotor; Study of digital control 
systems; DC servo motor position control; Closed loop speed control of DC motor; Study of 
temperature control systems; Feedback control of magnetic levitation system; PID stabilization 
of an inverted cart -pendulum system; Study of coupled tank system; PID stabilization of a twin 
rotor MIMO system; PID control of  two link flexible manipulator.  
Subject Code: 
EC3P002  Name: Digital Signal Processing  Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credits: 2  
Prerequisite: Digital Signal Processing  
Fourier transform; Z -transform; Discrete Fourier transform (DFT); Fast Fourier transform (FFT); 
Infinite impulse response (IIR), Finite impulse response (FIR) filter designs  and power spectrum 
estimation.  
Subject Code: 
EE3P006  Name: Power Systems  Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credits: 2  
Prerequisite: Electrical Power Transmission and Distribution  Renewable Energy Systems 
Laboratory  
Performance of Transmission line (regulation and efficiency), parameter calculation (ABCD parameter), 
characteristics with and without compensation (voltage profile, Ferranti effect), fault transient studies 
(transient, sub -transient conditions, symmetrical and un -symmetrical faults), protection relay 
characteristics (over current, distance, differential relays), insulator testing (string  efficiency), dielectric 
strength of insulation, underground cable parameter calculation, earth insulation resistance test.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
31 
 SEMESTER – VII 
Subject Code: 
EE4L005  Name: Digital Control System  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Control Systems  
Introduction: Basic structure of digital control systems, Sampled -data control systems, DAC, 
ADC, Sample -and-hold operation, Sampling and reconstruction: ZOH and frequency domain 
considerations, Shanon’s  sampling theorem, Frequency spectrum; Transform Analysis of 
Sampled -Data Systems: Linear difference equation, Pulse response, Z -transform: review of 
properties and theorems, Inverse Z -transform, Relationship between z -plane and s -plane, 
Transform pairs; D iscrete -Time System Modeling: Pulse transfer function, z -transfer function, 
discrete -time system with cascaded elements separated and not -separated by a sampler, Pulse 
transfer function of ZOH, Closed -loop systems, Characteristic equation, Sampled signal f low 
graph, Mason’s gain formula; Stability Analysis: Introduction, Theorems, Stability tests: Bilinear 
transformation method and Jury’s test, Performance specifications in time domain, Prototype 
second order system and response analysis, Steady state error  analysis, Root loci; Frequency 
Domain Analysis: Introduction, Polar Plot, Nyquist stability criterion, Bode plot, Gain and phase 
margin, Closed -loop frequency response, z -domain equivalents of s -domain transfer functions; 
State Space Analysis: State equat ions and state transition equations with S/H devices, 
Relationship between state equations and transfer functions, Diagonalization, Computation of 
state transition matrix, State diagram, Decomposition of transfer functions, Realization of digital 
filters, Controllability and observability; Pole Placement Design and State Observers: 
Introduction, State feedback, Pole assignment by state feedback, Ackerman’s formula, Deadbeat 
control, State observers, Deadbeat observer, The Separation Principle, Reduce order observer; 
Design of Digital Compensators: Frequency response based designs: Lead compensator, Lag 
compensator, Lead -lag compensator, Design using root locus plots: Lead compensator, Lag 
compensator, Lead -lag compensator, Digital PID controller design.  
 
Text Books:  
1. B. C. Kuo, “Digital Control Systems”, 2nd Edition, Oxford University Press, 2012.  
2. K. Ogata, “Discrete -Time Control Systems”, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall, 2009.  
3. Charles L. Phillips , Troy Nagle , James Brickley, “Digital Control System Analysis and Design”, Prentice Hall, 
2014.  
4. M. Gopal, “Digital Control Engineering”, New Age International Publishers, 1996.  
Subject Code: 
EE4L006  Name: Renewable Energy System s L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite:  Power Electronics,  Power System Operation and Control  
Brief idea on renewable and distributed sources, their usefulness and advantages; Wind Energy  
Systems: Estimates of wind energy potential, wind maps, Instrumentation for wind velocity 
measurements, Aerodynamic and mechanical aspects of wind machine design , Conversion to 
electrical energy, Aspects of location of wind farms, Wind speed and energy, Speed and power 
relations, Power extraction from wind, Tip speed ratio (TSR), Functional structure of wind energy 
conversion systems, Pitch and speed control, Powe r-speed -TSR characteristics, Fixed speed and 
variable speed wind turbine control, Power optimization, Electrical generators, Self -Excited and Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
32 
 Doubly -Fed Induction Generators operation and control; Solar PV Systems: Present and new 
technological development s in photovoltaic, estimation of solar irradiance, components of solar 
energy systems, solar -thermal system applications to power generation, heating, Types of PV 
systems, Modeling of PV cell, current -voltage and power -voltage characteristics, Effects of 
temperature, Solar array simulator, Sun tracking, Peak power operations, PV system, MPPT 
techniques, Effects of partial shading on the characteristic curves and associated MPPT 
techniques; Hydel Power: Water power estimates, use of hydrographs, hydraulic tu rbine, 
characteristics and part load performance, design of wheels, draft tubes and penstocks, plant 
layouts; Brief idea of other sources viz., tidal, geothermal, gas -based, etc. Requirements of 
hybrid/combined use of different renewable and distributed so urces, Need of energy storage; 
Control of frequency and voltage of distributed generation in Stand -alone and Grid -connected 
mode, use of energy storage and power electronics interfaces for the connection to grid and 
loads, Design and optimization of size o f renewable sources and storages; Concept of microgrid, 
operation of microgrid in grid -connected as well as isolated mode, power quality problems and 
fault -ride through capability of microgrid; Integration of large capacity renewable sources to 
grid: Opera tion and control, trends and challenges, future needs viz., advanced characteristics 
of renewable energy generating units and plants, improved flexibility in conventional 
generation, transmission technology.  
 
Text Books:  
1. Math J. Bollen, Fainan Hassan ‘Inte gration of Distributed Generation in the Power System’, IEEE 
Press, 2011.  
2. Loi Lei Lai and Tze Fun Chan ‘Distributed Generation: Induction and Permanent Magnet Generators’, 
Wiley -IEEE Press, 2007.  
3. Studies’ Craig Anderson and Rudolf I. Howard ‘Wind and Hydro power Integration: Concepts, 
Considerations and Case, Nova Publisher, 2012.  
4. Amanda E. Niemi and Cory M. Fincher ‘Hydropower from Small and Low -Head Hydro Technologies’, 
Nova Publisher, 2011.  
5. D. Yogi Goswami, Frank Kreith and Jan F. Kreider  ‘Principles of Solar Engineering’, Taylor & Francis 
2000.  
6. G. N. Tiwari ‘Solar Energy Technology’, Nova Science Publishers, 2005.  
7. Math J. Bollen, Fainan Hassan ‘Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power System’, IEEE 
Press, 2011.  
8. S. Heier  and R. Waddington ‘Grid Intergration of Wind Energy Conversion Systems’, Wiley, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
33 
 SEMESTER – VIII  
Subject Code: 
EE4P002  Name: Renewable Energy Systems  Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credits: 2  
Prerequisite: Renewable Energy Systems  
Experiments on characteristics and control aspects of various renewable energy systems such 
as wind energy conversion system, photovoltaic systems, wave energy systems and hybrid 
systems etc. will be performed. Both isolated and grid -connected systems will be used in the  
experiments  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
34 
 Syllabus for Elective Courses 1 and 2  
Subject Code: EC4L001  Name: Semiconductor Devices  L-T-P: 3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Introduction to Electronics  
 
Semiconductor Fundamentals, Crystal Structure, Energy bands, Intrinsic and extrinsic 
semiconductors, Fermi Level, Carrier concentrations at thermal equilibrium, Carrier transport 
phenomenon: drift and diffusion, Scattering, Excess carriers in semiconductor s: generation, 
recombination and injection of carriers, transient and steady state response, Basic governing 
equations in semiconductors; Physical description of p -n junctions, Transport equations, 
current -voltage characteristics, deviations from simple th eory, small -signal ac analysis, metal -
semiconductor junctions, hetero junctions; BJT fundamentals, operation regions, BJT equivalent 
circuits and modelling frequency response of transistors, pnpn diodes, SCR; MOS structure, flat -
band threshold voltages, MO S static characteristics, small signal parameters and equivalent 
circuit, charge sheet model, strong, moderate and weak inversion, short channel effects, scaling 
laws of MOS transistors, LDD MOSFET, NMOS and CMOS IC technology, CMOS latch -up 
phenomenon; op tical absorption in a semiconductors, photovoltaic effect, solar cell, 
photoconductors, PIN photodiode, avalanche photodiode, LED, semiconductor lasers; Negative 
conductance in semiconductors, transit time devices, IMPATT, Gunn device, BiCMOS devices.  
Text s/References : 
1. Ben G Streetman, S K Banarjee, Solid State Electronic Devices, 6th edition, PHI India, New Delhi, 2007.  
2. R S Muller, T.I.Kamins, Device Electronics for Integrated Circuits, 3rd edition, Wiley -India, New Delhi, 2012.  
3. S M Sze, K K  Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd edition, John Wiley, New Jersey, 2007.  
4. P Bhattacharya, Semiconductor Optoelectronics, 2nd edition, Pearson, New Jersey, 1997.  
 
Subject Code: EC6L005  Name: Statistical Signal Processing  L-T-P: 3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Digital Signal Processing  
 
Review of Probability and Stochastic Process; Estimation Theory:  Minimum -variance unbiased 
estimator (MVUE), Cramer -Rao Lower bound, Best Linear Unbiased Estimator, Maximum 
likelihood Estimator, General Bayesian Estimator , Detection Theory: Neyman Pearson Theorem, 
Receiver Operating Characteristics, Matched Filters, Composite Hypothesis Testing; 
Nonparametric Spectral Estimation: Estimation of power spectrum of stationary random signal 
using periodogram -various me thods, Joint signal analysis and estimation of cross power 
spectrum; Linear Signal Model: Synthesis of coloring filter and Analysis of whitening filter, 
Rational power spectra (AR, MA, ARMA), Relationship between filter parameters and 
autocorrelation seque nces, Lattice -Ladder filter realization; Parametric Spectral Estimation: 
Order selection criterion of AR model , Minimum -variance, Maximum entropy and Maximum 
likelihood spectrum estimation Harmonic models and frequency estimation techniques 
Harmonic Decom position, MUSIC algorithm, ESPRIT algorithm; Linear Optimum Filter: Optimum 
FIR Filter, PCA of optimum linear estimator and its frequency domain interpretation, Forward 
and Backward Linear prediction and optimum reflection coefficients Optimum causal and n on-
causal IIR Filters, De -convolution and Signal restoration Algorithms and Structure of Optimum Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
35 
 Linear Filters Levinson Recursion for optimum estimate, Order -recursive algorithms for 
optimum FIR filters and its lattice structures.  
Texts/References : 
1. S. M.  Kay, Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing, Vol I: EstimationTheory, Vol II: Detection Theory, 
Prentice Hall, 1998.  
2. Harry L. Van Trees, Detection, Estimation, and Modulation Theory, Part I, Wiley -Inter science, 2001  
3. Monson H. Hayes, Statistical D igital Signal Processing and Modeling, John Wiley, 1996.  
 
Subject Code: EE6L009  Name: High Voltage Engineering  L-T-P: 3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
Break Down in Solid Dielectrics: Intrinsic breakdown, electromechanical breakdown, thermal 
breakdown, breakdown of solid dielectrics in practice, Breakdown in composite dielectrics, solid 
dielectrics used in practice; Break Down in Gaseous and Liquid Diele ctrics: Gases as insulating 
media, collision process, Ionization process, Townsend’s criteria of breakdown in gases, 
Paschen’s law; Generation of High Voltages and Currents: Generation of High Direct Current 
Voltages, Generation of High alternating voltage s, Generation of Impulse Voltages, Generation 
of Impulse currents, Tripping and control of impulse generators; Measurement of High Voltages 
and Currents: Measurement of High Direct Current voltages, Measurement of High Voltages 
alternating and impulse, Mea surement of High Currents -direct, alternating and Impulse, 
Oscilloscope for impulse voltage and current measurements.  
Texts/References:  
1. E. Kuffel, and W. S. Zaengl, J. Kuffel, “High Voltage Engineering: Fundamentals,” CBS Publishers, 2005.  
2. R. Arora and W. Mosch, ‘High Voltage and Electrical Insulation Engineering’ John Wiley & Sons, 2011.  
3. W. Peek, and F. W. Peek “Dielectric Phenomena in High Voltage Engineering,: Rough Draft Printing, 2008.  
4. L. L. Alston, “High Voltage Technology,” Oxford University Press, 2 011.  
 
Subject Code: EE6L011  Name: Energy Storage Systems  L-T-P: 3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Introduction to Electronics  
 
Energy Storage Need of energy storage; Different modes of Energy Storage. Potential energy: Pumped 
hydro storage; KE and Compressed gas system: Flywheel storage, compressed air energy storage; 
Electrical and magnetic energy storage: Capacitors, electromagn ets; Chemical Energy storage: Thermo -
chemical, photo -chemical, bio -chemical, electro -chemical, fossil fuels and synthetic fuels. Hydrogen for 
energy storage. Solar Ponds for energy storage. Electrochemical Energy Storage Systems Batteries: 
Primary, Seconda ry, Lithium, Solid -state and molten solvent batteries; Lead Lead acid batteries; Nickel 
Cadmium Batteries; Advanced Batteries. Role of carbon nano -tubes in electrodes. Magnetic and Electric 
Energy Storage Systems Superconducting Magnet Energy Storage(SMES)  systems; Capacitor and 
Batteries: Comparison and application; Super capacitor: Electrochemical Double Layer Capacitor (EDLC), 
principle of working, structure, performance and application, role of activated carbon and carbon nano -
tube.  
 
Texts/References:  
1. R. Huggins, Robert ‘Energy Storage’, Springer, 2010.  
2. Ter-Gazarian ‘Energy Storage for Power Systems’, Institution of Engineering and Technology, 1994 . 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
36 
 Subject Code: EC4L002  Name: Opto -Electronics  L-T-P: 3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Introduction to Electronics  
 
Review of basic principles from physics, optical wave representation, interferometers, optical 
resonators, planar mirror resonators, modes of resonators, spherical mirror resonators, 
confinement, gaussian  beams, photons and matter, energy levels; Photon optics: interactions of 
photons and atoms, population inversion, spontaneous and stimulated emission; Lasers: gain 
mechanism, rate equations, pumping, gain and gain coefficient,  laser oscillation theory,  laser 
types, power and spectral distribution , polarization, mode selection, light emitting diodes, 
fabry -perot lasers, erbium -doped fiber amplifiers (edfa); Photo detectors: properties of photo 
detectors, photoconductors, photodiodes. Avalanche photodiode s, phototransistors and noise 
mechanisms, signal -to-noise analysis, and modulation of optical signals, formats, and receivers; 
Noise and detection:  types of noise and distortion which affects optical signals, methods of 
reducing effects of noise and disto rtion, optimal detection methods and devices; Overview of 
opto -electronic networks: fddi, fiber channel, sonnet.  
Text Books:  
1. Saleh and Teich,  “Fundamentals of Photonics,”  Wiley Interscience, 2nd edition, 2007.    
2. J. Senior, “Optical Fiber Communications.  Principle and Practice,” Prentice Hall.  
Reference Books:    
1. Wilson and Hawkes  “Optoelectronics: An Introduction,  Prentice Hall; 3rd Ed., 1997.  
2. Journal Readings (IET - Optoelectronics)  
 
Subject Code: EC6L002  Name: Image and Video Processing  L-T-P: 3-1-0 Credits: 4 
Prerequisite: Digital Signal Processing  
 
Introduction to digital image processing, intensity transformation, spatial filtering, frequency 
domain filtering, point and line detection, edge detection, Hough Transform, image restoration, 
color  processing, thresholding, image segmentation, affine transformation, image transforms, 
multi -resolution image analysis, shape and texture representation and description, introduction 
to object recognition, image compression, JPEG, introduction to digital video, video compression 
standards, motion estimation.  
Texts/References:  
1. Gonzalez and Woods, “Digital Image processing,” 3rd Ed., Pearson and Prentice Hall, 2009.  
2. W.K. Pratt, “Digital image processing,” 4th Ed., Wiley India, 2007.  
3. K.R. Castleman, “Digital  image processing,” 2nd Ed., Pearson, 2012.  
4. A.K. Jain, “Fundamentals of digital image processing,” Prentice Hall, 1989.  
 
Subject Code: EE6L002  Name: Electric Power Quality  L-T-P: 3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Electrical Technology, Power Electronics  
 
Brief review of various power quality (PQ) problems: Source of generation and their impacts on 
equipment and systems, need of monitoring, international power quality standards, Passive 
Filters: Control of harmonics using passive L -C filters, tuned and de -tuned filters, their design 
criterion and implementation, Active Power Filters: Power factor improvement, reactive power Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
37 
 compensation, mitigation of harmonics and voltage sag compensation using active power filters. 
Study of various active power filters vi z., static shunt compensators (STATCOM), dynamic 
voltage restorer (DVR), unified power quality conditioner (UPQC), etc. Suitability of type of active 
filters for mitigation of various power quality problems, Design of active power filters, various 
topologi es and control schemes.  
Texts/References:  
1. A. Ghosh and Gerard Ledwich ‘Power Quality Enhancement Using Custom Power Devices (Power 
Electronics and Power Systems)’, Springer; 2002.  
2. S. Santoso, H. W. Beaty, R. C. Dugan, and M. F. McGranaghan, ‘Electrical Power Systems Quality’, McGraw -
Hill Professional, 2002.  
3. M. H. Bollen ‘Understanding Power Quality Problems: Voltage Sags and Interruptions’, Wiley -IEEE Press, 
1999.  
4. N. G. Hingorani and L. Gyugy ‘Understanding FACTS: Concepts and Technology of Flexible AC T ransmission 
Systems’, Wiley -IEEE Press, 1999.  
 
 
Subject Code: EE6L010  Name: Advanced Power Electronics  L-T-P: 3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Power Electronics  
Advanced Switch Mode Power Converters: Cuk   dc-dc converter, Full bridge dc -dc converter, 
Half-bridge converter  Forward converter, Flyback converter, Push -pull converter, Resonant 
Converters: Introduction, classification of resonant converters, series and parallel resonant 
inverters, load resonan t converters, resonant switch converters, zero voltage and zero current 
switching resonant converters, Multilevel Inverters: Concept, types of multilevel inverters, 
diode -clamped, flying -capacitor, and cascaded multilevel inverters, applications, compariso n; 
FACTS: Principles of shunt and series compensation, compensators: TCR, TCS, SVC, TSSC, TCSC, 
UFC, comparison, Matrix converters: Basic principles and analysis, applications.  
Texts/References:  
1. M. H. Rashid, “Power Electronics: Circuits, Device and Applications”, 2nd Ed. 1993, Prentice -Hall, Inc.  
2. N. Mohan, T. M. Undeland, and W. P. Robbins, “Power Electronics: Converters, Application and Design”, 
3rd. Ed., John Wiley, 2003  
3. A. M. Trzynadlowski, “Introduction to Modern Power Electronics” John Wiley, 19 98. 
 
Subject Code: EE6L007  Name: Industrial Instrumentation  L-T-P: 3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Measurement and Electronic Instruments  
 
Introduction to Instrumentation system; Static and Dynamic characteristics of Instrument; 
Pressure measurement: Elastic transducers (Bourdon Gauge, Bellow and Diaphragm Gauge); 
Temperature measurement: Thermocouple, Resistance Temperature Detector (RTD), 
Thermistor, Radiation Pyrometer; Flow and pressure measurements: Differential Pressure flow 
meter, Variable area flow meter, Variable reluctance transducer, Turbine flow meter, Ultrasonic 
flow meter (Both transit time and Doppler Shift), Electromagnetic flo w meter and Mass flow 
meter; Measurement of level: Capacitance based and Float based method; Measurement of 
strain: Strain Gauge; Position sensor: Linear Variable Differential Transformer (LVDT), Synchro; 
Load and torque cell; pH probe and viscosity measur ement; Piezoelectric sensors; Ultrasonic Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
38 
 sensors; Pollution measurement; Smart sensors; Actuators and Control valves; Signal 
conditioning; Pneumatic and Hydraulic Instrumentation system.  
Texts/References:  
1. D. Patranabis , ‘Principles of Industrial Instrumentation’, Tata Mcgraw -Hill, 2001.  
2. W. C. Dunn, ‘Fundamentals of Industrial Instrumentation and Process Control’, Mcgraw -Hill, 2005.  
3. N. A. Anderson, ‘Instrumentation for process measurement and control’, CRC press, 1998.  
4. E. Doebelin ‘Measurement Systems: Application and Design ’, Mcgraw -Hill, 2003.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
39 
 Syllabus for Elective Courses 3 -6 
Subject Code: 
EC6L015  Name: Biomedical Signal Processing  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Digital Signal Processing  
 
Nature of biomedical signals, Artifacts removal, Event detection, Wave shape analysis, 
Frequency‐domain characterization, Biomedical system modeling,  Non -stationary signal 
analysis,  Detection of region of interests in biomedical images, Shape and textur e analysis,  
oriented pattern analysis, Image reconstruction of projections, Pattern classification and 
diagnostic decision, presentation of different case studies.  
Texts/References:  
1. R. M. Rangayyan, “Biomedical signal analysis,” Wiley, 2011.  
2. R. M. Rangayyan, “Biomedical image analysis,” CRC press, 2005.  
3. D. C. Reddy, Biomedical signal processing: principles and techniques, Tata McGraw Hill, 2012.  
4. Tompkins, Biomedical digital signal processing, Prentice Hall India, 1995.  
Subject Code: 
EC6L019  Name: F iber Optic Sensors  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
 
Classification of sensors, modulation and demodulation mechanism of sensors, interferometric 
sensors, optical fibres Doppler systems, polarization modulation sensors, fibre optic sensors for 
the measurement of temperature, pressure, displacement, turbidity, pollution, etc., multiplexed 
sensor systems, other sensor applications.  
Text/References Books:  
1. R.  Kasyap, ‘Fiber Bragg Gratings’, Academic Press, 2009.  
2. B. Glisic, D. Inaudi, ‘Fibre Optic Methods for Structural Health Monitoring’, Wiley, 2008.  
 
Subject Code: 
EC4L008  Name: Embedded Systems  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Digital Electronics and Microprocessor  
 
Embedded Processing Systems: Introduction, Components of Embedded Systems – Embedded 
Processor, Microcontrollers (PIC and ARM architectures), DSP and ASICs and SoC, Memory 
Devices: ROM and RAM family, Interfacing Memory, Simple I/O programming, Interrupts and 
their servicing, Timing Devices and Interfacing, Analog I/O Techniques, Introduction to HDL, 
Design of Embedded Processors and Components, Design Case Studies, Embedded 
Communication: Parallel Bus Standards, Serial Bus Standards, Networking Standards a nd 
Wireless Standards, Real Time Operating Systems (RTOS): Introduction, Memory Management, 
I/O Management and Device Drivers, Scheduling, Introduction to Software Design: Embedded 
System Life Cycle, Multicore and Heterogeneous Embedded Systems.  
Text Books : Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
40 
 1. W. Wolf, Computers as Components: Principles of Embedded Computing System Design, 2nd Ed.,  
Burlington, 2008.  
2. T Noergaard, Embedded Systems Architecture: A comprehensive Guide for Engineers and Prgrammers, 
Elsevier,Oxford,  2005.  
Reference Books:  
1. Steve Heath, Embedded System Design, 2nd Edition, Newnes, Burlington, 2003.  
 
Subject Code: 
EC6L027  Name: Pattern Recognition  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Digital signal processing, Probability and stochastic processes  
 
Introduction to pattern recognition; Bayesian decision theory : Classifiers, Discriminant 
functions, Decision surface, Normal density and discriminant functions, Parameter estimation 
methods: Maximum -Likelihood estimation, Gaussian mixture models, Expectat ion-
maximization method, Bayesian estimation, Hidden Markov models: Discrete hidden Markov 
models, Continuous density hidden Markov models; Dimensionality reduction methods: Fisher 
discriminant analysis, Principal component analysis; Non -parametric techniq ues for density 
estimation: Parzen -window method, K -Nearest Neighbour method, Linear discriminant function 
based classifiers: Perceptron , Support vector machines, Non -metric methods for pattern 
classification: Non -numeric data or nominal data  
Decision tr ees, Unsupervised learning and clustering: Criterion functions for clustering 
Algorithms for clustering: K -means, Hierarchical and other methods, Cluster validation.  
Texts/References:  
1. R.O.Duda, P.E.Hart and D.G.Stork , “Pattern Classification,” John Wiley, 2001.  
2. S.Theodoridis and K.Koutroumbas, “Pattern Recognition,” 4th Ed., Academic Press, 2009.  
3. C.M.Bishop, “Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning,” Springer, 2006.  
 
 
Subject Code: 
EC6L024  Name: Array Signal Processing  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisites: Digital Signal Processing, Probability and Statistics processes  
 
Introduction: Array Processing and Applications, Arrays and Spatial Filters: Uniform Linear Array, 
Array Steering, Array Performance, Linear Aperture, Synthesis of Linear Arrays and Apertures: 
Spectral Weighting, Array Polynomials, Minimum Beamwidth, Null Steering, Spatially Non -
uniform Linear Arrays, Broadband Arrays, Planar Arrays and Apertures: Rectangular Arrays, 
Circular Arrays, Circular Apertures, Non -planar Arrays, Characterization of Space -time 
Processes: Snapshot Models, Space -time Random Process, Optimum Waveform Estimation: 
Optimum Beamformers, MVDR and MPDR Beamformers, LCMV and LCMP Beamformers, 
Eigenspace Beamformer, Beamspace Beamformer, Broadband Beamformer, Adaptive 
Beamformers: Parametric Estimation, RLS, LMS, Gradient Algorithms, Parameter  Estimation and 
Direction of Arrival Estimation: Cramer -Rao Bounds, Maximum Likelihood Estimation, Capon 
methods, Subspace methods - MUSIC, Minimum -Norm and ESPRIT techniques.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
41 
 Text Books:  
1. Harry L. Van Trees, Optimum Array Processing (Part IV of Detection, Estimation, and Modulation Theory), 
Wiley -Interscience, 2002.  
Reference Books:  
1. D. E. Dugeon and D. H. Johnson, “Array Signal Processing: Concepts and Techniques,”  Prentice Hall, 
1993.  
2. P. Stoica  and R. L. Moses, “Spectral Analysis of Signals,” Prentice Hall, 2005.   
 
Subject Code: 
EE6L003  Name: Power System Dynamics & Control  L-T-P: 
4-0-0 Credits: 4  
Prerequisites: Power System Operation and Control  
Basic Ideas of Modeling  of Synchronous machines, excitation systems and Governors - Steady 
state, Dynamic and Transient stability. State space formulation of single and multi -machine 
models with control equipments. Damping effects of FACTS devices.  
Sub-synchronous Resonance: Mod al Analysis, Torsional Oscillations, induction generator effect, 
Torsional interaction effect, countermeasure.  
Application of numerical techniques to multi -machine dynamic and transient stability studies. 
Generation/Frequency Characteristics and load frequ ency characteristics, tie -line bias control, 
Automatic Generation Control, Alert and emergency system operation control. Control of reactive 
power flow: AVR, OLTC Transformers, FACTS, Static var compensators, system loss 
minimization, Emergency control, Re liability and security, Protective relaying.  
 
Texts/References:  
1. Yao-Nan Yu ‘Electric Power System Dynamics’, Academic Press, 1983.  
2. Olle I. Elgerd ‘Electric Energy Systems Theory: An Introduction’, Tata McGraw Hill, 2001.  
3. K. R. Padiyar  ‘Power System Dynamics: Stability and Control’, B P B Publications, 2002.  
 
 
 
 
Subject Code: 
EE6L004  Name: Power System Protection  L-T-P: 
4-0-0 Credits: 4 
Prerequisites: Electrical Power Transmission and Distribution  
 
Generation, propagation and interaction of electrical transients in electric power systems. 
Analysis of single and multiple transients including three phase and switching transients. 
Mathematical modeling of transmission lines and other power equipment in the presence of 
surge phenomena. Evolution in Protection systems, Characteristic of protective relays, Basic 
elements of Digital protection, signal conditioning and conversion, Fourier analysis and least 
square based techniques, Differential equation based  techniques for transmission line 
applications, Fundamentals of travelling wave based techniques, Digital differential protection 
of transformers and transmission systems. Intelligent protection using ANN and Fuzzy systems, 
Application of advanced DSP in n umerical relaying.  
Texts/References Books:  
1. A. T. Johns and S. Kalman ‘Digital Protection for Power Systems’, IET, 1997.  
2. A. G. Phadke and J. Thorp ‘Computer Relaying for Power Systems’, Wiley, 2009.  
3. A. Greenwood ‘Electrical Transient in Power Systems’, McGr aw Hill, 1990.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
42 
 Subject Code: 
EE6L017  Name: Distribution System Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisites: Electrical Power Transmission and Distribution  
Introduction to power distribution system, Distribution transformer, Substation Bus Schemes, 
Substation Location, The Rating of a Distribution Substation , Substation Service Area with n 
Primary Feeders , Comparison of the Four -and Six -Feeder Patterns, Der ivation of the K Constant, 
Substation Application Curves, Interpretation of the Percent Voltage Drop Formula, Advanced 
SCADA Concepts and  Substation Automation, substation grounding, Radial and Loop Type 
Primary Feeder, Primary Network, Primary -Feeder Vol tage Levels and Loading, Radial Feeders 
with Uniformly and Nonuniformly Distributed Load, A,B,C,D General Circuit Constants to Radial 
Feeders, Design of Radial Primary and Secondary Distribution Systems, Secondary Voltage Levels 
and Networks, Economic Desi gn, Three -Phase Balanced Primary Lines, Non three -Phase Primary 
Lines, Four -Wire Multigrounded Common Neutral Distribution System, Distribution Costs, 
Economic Analysis of Equipment Losses, Capacitors in Distribution Systems and Optimum 
allocation, Dynamic  Behavior of Distribution Systems, Quality of Service and Voltage Standards, 
Voltage Control, Feeder Voltage Regulators, Line -Drop Compensation, Distribution Capacitor 
Automation, Voltage Fluctuations.  
Text Books:   
1. J. J. Burke  “Power Distribution Engineering: Fundamentals and Applications”,  CRC Press, 1994.  
2. T. Gönen  “Electric power distribution system engineering”,  McGraw -Hill, 1986  
Reference Book:   
1. Pabla, “ Electric Power Distribution”, McGraw -Hill Education, 2005  
 
 
Subject Code: 
EC6L003  Name: Information Theory and Coding  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3 
Prerequisites: Digital Communication / Communication Systems  
Introduction: entropy and mutual information theory: joint entropy, conditional entropy, 
relationship between entropy and mutual information, chain rules for entropy, relative entropy, 
mutual information, jensen’s inequality fano’s inequality; An introduction to codes: coding: kraft 
inequality, optimal codes, bounds on optimal code length, kraft inequality for uniquely 
decodable codes,  shannon and huffman codes, shannon, fano, elias codes, block codes, linear 
block codes, cyclic codes; Efficient encoding, information sources; average code word length; 
huffman encoding;  noiseless coding: the no iseless coding theorem; Channel capacity: discrete 
memoryless channels and capacity, examples of channel capacity, symmetric channels, 
properties of channel capacity, channel coding theorem; Theory and practice of error -control 
coding: trellis diagram and the viterbi algorithm, convolution coding in mobile communications  
and modern graph -based codes (turbo -codes and ldpc codes), the main coding theory problem.  
Text Books:  
1. T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, “Elements of Information Theory,” 2nd Ed., Wiley -Interscience,  2006.  ISBN -
13: 978 -0471241959.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
43 
 2. S. Lin and D. J. Costello, “Error Control Coding,” 2nd  Ed., Pearson Prentice Hall, 2004, ISBN -13: 978 -             
0130426727.  
Reference Books:   
1. R. G. Gallager, “Information Theory and Reliable Communication, ” Wiley, 1968, ISBN -13: 978 -0471290483.  
2. I Csiszar and J. Korner, “Information Theory: Coding Theorems for Discrete Memoryless Systems,” 
Akademiai Kiado, December 1981, ISBN -13: 978 -9630574402.  
3. T. S. Han, “Information -Spectrum Methods in Information Theory, ” Springer, 2002, ISBN -13: 978 -
3642078125.  
4. Andre Neubauer, Jurgen Freedenberg, Volker Kuhn, “Coding theory Algorithm, Architectures and 
Applications”,Willey India Editions, ISBN: 978 -81-265-3432 -6, 2007.  
5. Ranjan Bose, “Information theory, Coding and Cryptog raphy,” TMH publication, ISBN: 978 -0-07-0669017, 
2008.  
6. Roman , Steven ,  “Introduction to Coding and Information Theory”, Springer, ISBN 978 -0-387-94704 -4 
7. Journal readings.  
 
Subject Code: 
EC6L016  Name: Computational Electromagnetics  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Electromagnetic Field Theory  
 
Applications of electromagnetics in the 21st century. Numerical Methods: ODE solvers, Euler, 
Runge -Kutta. Review of Basic Electromagnetics: Electrostatics, Magnetostatics , Wave Equations. 
Numerical Techniques: Method of Moements, Finite Difference Method, Finite Element 
method, Charge Simulation Method, Monte carlo method. Time Varying Electromagnetic Fiels: 
Eddy currents & skin depth, introduction to wavelets, families of  wavelets. Microwaves, Optics, 
Micromagnetics, Bio -electromagnetics. Tutorials and demonstration on PC, programming 
assignments.  
Text/ Reference Books : 
1. M.N.O. Sadiku, “Numerical Techniques in Electromagnetic,” 2nd Ed., CRC Press.  
2. E. Weber, “Electromagnetic  Fields,” Dover, 1951.  
3. P. P. Silvester, and R. L. Ferrari, “Finite Elements for Electrical Engineers,” Cambridge University Press 1996.  
4. J. Kiusalaas, “Numerical Methods in Engineering with Python,” Cambridge.  
 
Subject Code: 
EC6L023  Name: Adaptive Signal Processing  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Digital Signal Processing  
 
Introduction to adaptive filters, optimal estimation, linear estimation: normal equation, 
orthogonality principle, linear models. Constrained linear estimation: minimum variance 
unbiased estimation, steepest descent algorithms, stochastic gradient algorith ms: LMS 
algorithm, normalized LMS algorithm, RLS algorithm. Steady -state performance of adaptive 
filters, transient performance of adaptive filters, block adaptive filters, the least -squares 
criterion, recursive least -squares, lattice filters  
Texts/Reference Books:  
1. A. H. Sayed, “Fundamentals of Adaptive Filtering,” Wiley, 2003.  
2. S. Haykin, “Adaptive filter theory,” Fourth edition, Pearson, 2012.  
3. Widrow and Stearns, “Adaptive Signal Processing,” Pearson, 2007.  
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
44 
 Subject Code: 
EE6L005  Name: HVDC and Flexible AC Transmission Systems  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Power System Operation and Control, Power Electronics  
 
Description and application of HVDC transmission, DC System components and their functions, 
Converter configuration, Principles of DC Link control and Converter control characteristics, 
Firing angle, Current and extinction angle control, DC link power cont rol, Reactive power control 
and VAR sources, MTDC system types; Power flow in AC Systems, Definition of FACTS, 
Constraints of maximum transmission line loading. Benefits of FACTS, Uncompensated line, 
shunt and series compensation, Phase angle control. SVC and STATCOM, Operation and Control 
of TSC, TRC and STATCOM, Compensator Control; TSSC, SSSC, Static voltage and phase angle 
regulators TCVR and TCPAR. Operation and Control applications, Unified Power Flow Controller,  
Circuit Arrangement, Basic Principle of P and Q Control, independent real and reactive power 
flow control, Applications; Introduction to interline power flow controller, Compensation 
Devices, STS, SSC, SVR, Backup energy supply devices, Special purpose FA CTS controllers, 
Thyristor controlled voltage limiter and voltage regulator, Thyristor controlled braking resistor 
and current limiter.  
Text Books:  
1. N.G Hingorani, L. Gyugyi, “Understanding FACTS: Concepts and Technology of Flexible AC Transmission 
System s”, IEEE Press Book, Standard Publishers and Distributors, Delhi, 2001.  
2. Padiyar K.R., “HVDC Power Transmission System”, Wiely Eastern PVT Limited.  
Reference Books:  
1. E.W. Kimbark “Direct Current transmission”, Vol.1, John Wielly, New York.  
2. T,J.E  Miller, “Reactive Power Control in Electric Systems”, John Wiley & Sons.  
 
Subject Code: 
EE6L014  Name: Smart Grid Technology  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Power System Operation and Control, Power Electronics  
 
Review of basic elements of electrical power systems, desirable traits of a modern grid, principal 
characteristics of the smart grid, key technology areas; Smart grid communication: Two way 
digital communication paradigm, network architectures, IP -based sy stems, Power line 
communications, advanced metering infrastructure; Renewable Generation: Renewable 
Resources: Wind and Solar, Microgrid Architecture, Tackling Intermittency, Distributed Storage 
and Reserves; Wide Area Measurement: Sensor Networks, Phasor Measurement Units, 
Communications Infrastructure, Fault Detection and Self -Healing Systems, Application and 
Challenges; Security and Privacy: Cyber Security Challenges in Smart Grid, Defense Mechanism, 
Privacy Challenges.  
Texts/Reference Books:  
1. J. Momoh  ‘Smart Grid: Fundamentals of Design and Analysis’ Wiley -IEEE Press, 2012.  
2. P.  F. Schewe ‘The Grid: A Journey through the Heart of our Electrified World’ Joseph Henry Press, 2006.  
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
45 
 Subject Code: 
EC6L004  Name: Advanced Digital Signal Processing  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3 
Prerequisite: Digital Signal Processing  
 
Multi -rate digital signal processing: decimation, interpolation, sampling rate conversion, digital 
filter banks, two -channel quadrature mirror filter bank, M -channel QMF bank, Linear prediction 
and optimum linear filters: forward and backward linear predic tion, normal equations, AR lattice 
and ARMA lattice -ladder filters, Wiener filters, Power spectrum estimation: nonparametric and 
parametric methods, filter bank methods, Eigen analysis algorithms, Time -frequency analysis: 
uncertainty principle, Short -time Fourier transform, Wigner distribution, Kernel design, Gabor 
wavelets, multi -resolution analysis.  
Texts/Reference Books:  
1. Proakis and Manolakis, “Digital Signal Processing: Principles, Algorithms and Applications,” 4th Ed., 
Pearson, 2012.  
2. Cohen , “Time -frequency Analysis,” Prentice -Hall, 1995.  
3. Vaseghi, “Advanced digital signal processing,” 4th Ed., Wiley, 2008.  
4. Vaidyanathan, “Multi -rate systems and filter banks,” Pearson, 1992.  
 
Subject Code: 
EC6L017  Name: Semiconductor Device Modelling  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Pre-requisite:  Semiconductor Devices  
 
Review of semiconductor physics: Quantum foundation, Carrier scattering, high field effects; P - 
N junction diode modeling: Static model, Large signal model and SPICE models; BJT modeling: 
Ebers - Moll, Sta tic, large -signal, small - signal models. Gummel - Poon model. Temperature and 
area effects. Power BJT model, SPICE models, Limitations of GP model; Advanced Bipolar 
models: VBIC, HICUM and MEXTARM;MOS Transistors: LEVEL 1, LEVEL 2 ,LEVEL 3, BSIM, 
HISIMVEKV  Models, Threshold voltage modeling, Punchthrough, Carrier velocity modeling, 
Short channel effects, Channel -length modulation, Barrier lowering, Hot carrier effects, Mobility 
modeling, Model parameters; Analytical and Numerical modeling of BJT and MOS tra nsistors; 
Types of models for Heterojunction Bipolar Transistors, Compact modeling concepts, Modeling 
of HBTs, HBT noise models, Measurement and parameter extraction.  
Text Books:  
1. G. Massobrio, P. Antognetti, Semiconductor Device Modeling with SPICE, 2nd edition, McGraw -Hill, New York,1993.  
2. M. Rudolph, Introduction to Modeling HBTs, Artech House, Boston, 2006.  
Reference Books:  
1. S. M. Sze, K. K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd edition, John Wiley, New Jersey, 2007.  
2. G. A. Armstrong, C. K. Maiti, Te chnology Computer Aided Design for Si, SiGe and GaAs Integrated Circuits ,IET Series, 
London, 2007.  
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
46 
 Subject Code: 
EE6L015  Name: Advanced High Voltage Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: None  
High Voltage Testing of Electrical Apparatus: Testing of Insulators and bushings, Testing of Isolators and 
circuit breakers, Testing of cables, Testing of Transformers, Testing of Surge Arresters, Radio Interference 
measurements;  
Partial discharges and th eir measurement: Introduction, Partial discharge degradation mechanisms, 
Partial discharge measurements.  
Non Thermal Atmospheric Pressure Plasma: Non -thermal plasma stabilization at high pressure, 
Townsend and spark breakdown mechanisms, corona discharge, pulse corona discharge, dielectric 
barrier discharge, spark discharge, atmospheric pressure glows, microplasmas.  
Text/ Reference Books : 
1. D. K. K. Feser, and Y. N. Rao “High -Voltage Test Techniques” Newnes, 2001.  
2. D. A. Lloyd “Electrostatic Precipitator Handb ook,” Institute of Physics Publishing, 1988.  
3. M. Haddad and D. Warne “Advances in High Voltage Engineering” IET, 2009.  
4. J. Ernest Harry ‘Introduction to Plasma Technology’ Wiley -vch Verlag Gmbh, 2010.  
5. J. Reece Roth, J. Reece Roth, and Roth J. Reece ‘Industri al Plasma Engineering – Volume -2’ Taylor & Francis Group, 
2001.  
6. B. M. Penetrante, ‘Non -Thermal Plasma Techniques for Pollution Control: Part B: Electron Beam and Electrical 
Discharge Processing’ Springer, 2012.  
 
 
 
 
Subject Code: 
EE4L004  Name: Advanced Electric Machines  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Electric Machines, Electromagnetic Field Theory  
 
Single Phase Induction Motors And Special Machines: Constructional details of single phase 
induction motor  – Double revolving field theory and operation  – Equivalent circuit  – No load 
and blocked rotor test  – Performance analysis – Starting methods of single -phase induction 
motors - Shaded pole induction motor  - Linear reluctance motor  - Repulsion motor  - Hysteresis 
motor - AC series motor; Synchronous Reluctance Motors: Constructional features – Types – 
Axial and radial air gap motors – Operating pr inciple – Reluctance – Phasor diagram - 
Characteristics – Vernier motor; Stepping Motors: Constructional features – Principle of 
operation – Variable reluctance motor – Hybrid motor – Single and multi -stack configurations – 
Theory of torque predictions – Linear and non -linear analysis – Characteristics – Drive circuits.  
Switched Reluctance Motors: Constructional features – Principle of operation – Torque 
prediction – Power controllers – Non -linear analysis – Microprocessor based control - 
Characteristics – Computer control; Permanent magnet brushless d.c. Motors: Principle of 
operation – Types – Magnetic circuit analysis – EMF and torque equations – Power controllers – 
Motor characteristics and control; Permanent Magnet Synchronous Motors: Principle of 
opera tion – EMF and torque equations – Reactance – Phasor diagram – Power controllers - 
Converter - Volt-ampere requirements – Torque speed characteristics - Microprocessor based 
control.   
Text Book:  
1. T.J.E. Miller, “Brushless Permanent Magnet and Reluctance Motor Drives”, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1989.  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
47 
 2. P.P. Aearnley, “Stepping Motors – A Guide to Motor Theory and Practice”, Peter Perengrinus, London, 
1982.  
3. D.P. Kothari and I.J. Nagrath, ‘Electric Machines’, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd, 2002.  
4. P.S. Bhimbhra, ‘Electrical Machinery’, Khanna Publishers, 2003.  
 
Reference Book:   
1. T. Kenjo, “Stepping Motors and Their Microprocessor Controls”, Clarendon Press London, 1984.  
2. T. Kenjo and S. Nagamori, “Permanent Magnet and Brushless DC Motors”, Clarendon Press , London, 1988.  
3. A.E. Fitzgerald, Charles Kingsley, Stephen.D.Umans, ‘Electric Machinery’, Tata McGraw Hill publishing 
Company Ltd, 2003.  
4. J.B. Gupta, ‘Theory and Performance of Electrical Machines’, S.K.Kataria and Sons, 2002.  
5. K. Murugesh Kumar, ‘Electric M achines’, Vikas Publishing House Pvt Ltd, 2002.  
 
Subject Code: 
EE4L003  Name: Electric Drives  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits:  3 
Prerequisites: Power Electronics, Electric Machines  
Introduction : Parts of electric drives, choice of drive, relative features of AC and DC drives, 
Dynamics and control of electric drives:  Fundamental equations, multi -quadrant convention, 
equivalent drive parameters, load torque components, steady state stability, modes of 
operation, closed -loop control, PLL control, position control, selection of motor power rating, 
DC motor drives:  Performance of dc motors, starting, braking, transient analysis, speed control, 
methods of armature voltage control, modes of speed control, Ward -Leonard drives, single 
phase and three phase controlled rect ifier-fed dc drives, dual converter control, chopper 
controlled dc drives, rectifier control of dc series motor, performance analysis, Induction motor 
drives: Analysis and performance, starting, braking, speed control, stator voltage control, 
variable volt age variable frequency control, rotor resistance control, slip power recovery, 
Synchronous motor drive: Analysis and performance, characteristics of synchronous motor, 
power factor rating, operation from fixed frequency supply, variable speed drives, Tract ion 
drives: Traction load and motors, dc and ac traction drives.  
Text Books:  
1. M. H. Rashid, “Power Electronics: Circuits, Device and Applications”, 2nd Ed. 1993, Prentice -Hall, Inc.  
2. N. Mohan, T. M. Undeland,  and W. PRobbins, “Power Electronics: Converters,  Application and Design”, 3rd 
Ed., John Wiley, 2003.  
3. G. K. Dubey, “Fundamentals of Electrical Drives”, Narosa Publishing House, 1995.  
 
Subject Code: 
EE6L018  Name: Power System Planning  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite:  Power System Operation and Control  
 
Basic Planning Issues: Introduction, Power system elements and structure, Static and dynamic 
planning, Transmission and distribution planning; Ling -term and short -term planning, Basic 
issues in transmission planning; Optimization Techniques: Introduction; Problem definition and 
modelling, Mathematical and heuristic solution algorithms; Economic Principles: Introduction, 
Definition of various terms, Cash flow concept: time value of money and economic terms, 
Economic analysis: present worth method, annual cos t method, Rate of return method, 
Example; Load Forecasting: Introduction, Load characteristics and driving parameters, Spatial Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
48 
 load forecasting, Long -term forecasting methods: trend analysis, econometric modelling, end -
use analysis, combined analysis, Exam ples - load forecasting of small and large scale utility; 
Single and Multi -bus Generation Expansion Planning: Problem description and mathematical 
formulation, Objective functions and constraints, Solution approaches; Substation Expansion 
Planning: Problem  definition and formulation, Mathematical view: objection function and 
constraints, required data; Solution methodologies, Case studies; Network Expansion Planning: 
Problem definition and formulation: objective function and constraints, Solution methodolog ies: 
enumeration and heuristic methods, Case study; Reactive Power Planning:  Introduction, 
Voltage profile and stability, Performance control parameters, Static and dynamic reactive 
power sources, Static reactive resource allocation and sizing, Dynamic re active resource 
allocation and sizing, Solution methods, Case study; Planning with System Uncertainties: 
Introduction, Deregulation, Uncertainties in regulated and deregulated environment, Practical 
planning issues in deregulated environment, Dealing with uncertainties in planning: expected 
cost criterion, min -max regret criterion, Laplace criterion, and VNM criterion.  
 
Text  Books:  
1. H. Seifi and M. S. Sepasian, “Electric Power System Planning: Issues, Algorithms and Solutions”, 2011, Springer.  
2. R. L. Sullivan , “Power System Planning”, 1987, McGraw Hill.  
 
Reference Books:  
1. J. Schlabbach and K -H. Rofalsk, “Power System Engineering: Planning, Design, and Operation of Power Systems 
and Equipment”, 2008, Wiley.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
49 
 Dual Degree: B. Tech. (Electrical Engineering) + M. Tech. (Power Electronics 
and Drives) (7th Semester – 10th Semester Courses)  
SEMESTER – VII  
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact Hour  Syllabus  
Page No.  
Switched Mode Power Conversion  EE6L051  3-1-0 4 4  
Digital Control Systems  EE4L005  3-0-0 3 3 31 
Renewable Energy Systems  EE4L006  3-0-0 3 3 31-32 
Theory and Analysis of Electric Drives  EE6L052  3-1-0 4 4  
Switched Mode Power Conversion Laboratory  EE6P052  0-0-3 2 3  
Industrial Training  Defence  EE4T001  0-0-0 2 2  
Project - Part 1  EE4D001  0-0-6 4 0  
  Total  22 17  
SEMESTER – VIII  
Advanced Power Electronic Converters  EE6L053  3-0-0 3 3  
Advanced Machine Drives  EE6L055  3-1-0 4 4  
Grid Integration of Renewable Energy 
Systems  EE6L013  3-0-0 3 3  
Power Converter and Electric Drives 
Laboratory  EE6P053  0-0-3 2 3  
Renewable Energy Systems Laboratory  EE4P002  0-0-3 2 3 33 
Project - Part 2  EE4D002  0-0-9 6 0  
  Total  20 16  
SEMESTER – IX 
Elective I    3-0-0 3 3  
Elective II   3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 3/4  
Power Electronics System Simulation 
Laboratory  EE6P051  0-0-3 2 3 50 
Thesis Part I  EE6D051  0-0-0 12 0  
  Total  20/21  9/10   
SEMESTER – X 
Elective III   3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 3/4  
Thesis Part II  EE6D053  0-0-0 13 0  
  Total  16/17  3/4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
50 
 List of Elective Courses  
Subject Name  Subject Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus 
Page No.  
Elective – 1, 2  
Semiconductor Devices  EC4L001  3-0-0 3 3 34 
Dynamics of Linear Systems  EE6L056  3-0-0 3 3 56 
Statistical Signal Processing  EC6L005  3-0-0 3 3 34-35 
High Voltage Engineering  EE6L009  3-0-0 3 3 35 
Energy Storage Systems  EE6L011  3-0-0 3 3 35 
Opto -Electronics  EC4L002  3-0-0 3 3 36 
Image and Video Processing  EC6L002  3-1-0 4 4 36 
Electric Power Quality  EE6L002  3-0-0 3 3 36-37 
Industrial Instrumentation  EE6L007  3-0-0 3 3 37-38 
Artificial Intelligence  CS6L019  3-0-0 3 3 56 
Optical Communication  EC6L012  3-0-0 3 3 57 
Elective – 3, 4, 5, 6   
Biomedical Signal Processing  EC6L015  3-0-0 3 3 39 
Fiber Optic Sensors  EC6L019  3-0-0 3 3 39 
Embedded Systems  EC4L008  3-0-0 3 3 39-40 
Pattern Recognition  EC6L027  3-0-0 3 3 40 
Array Signal Processing  EC6L024  3-0-0 3 3 40-41 
Power System Dynamics & Control  EE6L003  4-0-0 4 4 41 
Power System Protection  EE6L004  4-0-0 4 4 41 
Distribution System Engineering  EE6L017  3-0-0 3 3 42 
Computational Electromagnetics  EC6L016  3-0-0 3 3 43 
Adaptive Signal Processing  EC6L023  3-0-0 3 3 43 
HVDC and Flexible AC Transmission Systems  EE6L005  3-0-0 3 3 44 
Computer Vision  EC6L029  3-0-0 3 3 57 
Smart Grid Technology  EE6L014  3-0-0 3 3 44 
Semiconductor Device Modelling  EC6L017  3-0-0 3 3 45 
Advanced High Voltage Engg.  EE6L015  3-0-0 3 3 46 
Power System Planning  EE6L018  3-0-0 3 3 47-48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
51 
 SEMESTER – VII 
Subject Code: 
EE6L0 51 Name: Switched Mode Power Conversion  L-T-P: 3-1-0 Credits: 4  
Linear voltage regulators, basic structures, advantages and disadvantages; Steady state 
analysis of basic DC -DC converters (Buck, boost, buck -boost) Steady state analysis of derived 
DC-DC (Cuk, SEPIC, Quadratic) converters. Steady state analysis of transformer isolated DC -DC 
converters (Forward, Flyback, push -pull, bridge) Switch ed mode voltage regulator 
specifications, block diagram, Modeling approach, assumptions and approximations. Dynamic 
models and transfer functions of hard switched converters in CCM and DCM modes. Regulator 
design example Current Programmed converters, Bloc k diagram, stabilization, modeling and 
transfer functions. Single phase PFC circuits. Resonant Converters, Soft switching principles: 
ZVS, ZCS, ZVZCS Resonant Load Converters: Variable frequency series and parallel resonant 
converters (Resonant Switch Conv erters (quasi resonant): Half and full wave operations and 
control. Resonant Transition Phase Modulated Converters, Reduction of VA ratings, fixed 
frequency operation and advantageous usages of device and transformer non -idealities; Soft 
Switched Bidirecti onal DC -DC Converters (Dual Active Bridge): Soft -switching under buck mode 
and boost mode operations with or without active clamp PWM Converters with Auxiliary 
Switch, ZVT /ZCT PWM Converters: Isolated and Non -isolated topologies with auxiliary switch; 
Auxiliary Resonant Commutated Pole Inverters: ZVT and ZCT concepts used for Inverters; 
Resonant DC Link Inverters: Forced oscillation of DC Link voltage by auxiliary switch.  
Texts/References:  
1. M H. Rashed , ‘Power Electronics Circuits, Devices and Applications’, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd, 2004.  
2. R. W. Erickson and D. Maksimovic, ‘Fundamental of Power Electronics’, Springer International Edition, 2005.  
3. N. Mohan, T. M. Underland, and W. Robbins, ‘Power Electronics Converters, Applications and Design’, John Wiley 
and Sons. Inc., 2004.  
 
Subject Code: 
EE6L0 52 Name: Theory and Analysis  of Electric 
Drives  L-T-P: 3-1-0 Credits: 4  
Introduction and review of electrical machines; Principles of electromagnetic energy 
conversion: General expression of stored magnetic energy, co -energy and force/torque, 
example using single and doubly excited system. Calculation of air gap mmf and per ph ase 
machine inductance using physical machine data; Voltage and torque equation of dc machine, 
three phase symmetrical induction machine and salient pole synchronous machines in phase 
variable form. Introduction to reference frame theory: static and rotati ng reference frames, 
transformation relationships, examples using static symmetrical three phase passive circuits. 
Generalized theory of rotating electrical machine and Krons primitive machine; Modelling of 
D.C and 3 - phase symmetrical induction and synchr onous machines; voltage and torque 
equations, derivation of steady state phasor relationship from dynamic model. Analysis and 
dynamic modelling of two phase asymmetrical induction machine and single phase induction 
machine.  
 
Introduction to Electric Drives – Need of electric drives, basic parts, present scenario of electric 
drives Mechanical Dynamics in an Electric Drive - Speed -torque characteristics of some 
common motors and loads, multi quadrant operation, equivalent values  of drive parameters, 
stability of an electric drive General Block Diagram of a Closed Loop Drive System – Speed, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
52 
 torque and position control Selection of Motor Power Rating – Thermal model of motor for 
heating and cooling, classes of motor duty, determina tion of motor rating Chopper Controlled 
DC Motor Drive – Different types of choppers and their quadrants of operations, PWM 
strategies for different choppers, chopper control of series DC motor. Power Semiconductor 
Switches Used in an Electric Drive System  - Basic structure, V -I characteristics and switching 
characteristics of thyristors and IGBTs, gate drive and protection circuits of thyristors and 
IGBTs. DC Motor Drive Using Phase Controlled Rectifier – DC motor drive using half controlled 
and fully cont rolled single phase and three phase rectifiers, continuous and discontinuous 
conduction modes of operation, 4 -quadrant operation using dual converter. Closed Loop 
Control of DC Motor – Operating limits of a separately excited DC motor drive, dynamic model 
of DC motor, dynamic model of chopper and phase controlled rectifier, design of single loop 
speed controller, cascaded controller design for DC motor using inner current control loop and 
outer speed control loop, field weakening operation.  
Texts/References : 
1. P. C. Krause, O. Wasynczuk and S. D. Sudhoff,‘ Analysis of Electric Machinery and Drive Systems’, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York, 2006.  
2. Chee -Mun Ong, ‘Dynamic Simulation of Electric Machinery using MATLAB’, Prentice Hall PTR, 1998.  
3. P. S. Bimbhra ‘Generaliz ed theory of electrical machines’, Khanna Publishers Delhi, 1995.  
4. G. K. Dubey, ‘Fundamentals of Electrical Drives’, CRC Press, 2002.  
 
 
Subject Code: 
EE6P052 Name: Switched Mode Power Conversion 
Laboratory  L-T-P: 0-0-3 Credits: 2  
Constant current Load, 15V Voltage regulator with current limit, Constant current -constant 
voltage regulator, Non -isolated Boost converter, Non -isolated Fly -back converter, Non -isolated 
Forward converter, Current mode control of Boost Converter, Current m ode control of Forward 
Converter, soft -switched converter . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
53 
 SEMESTER – VIII  
Subject Code: 
EE6L0 53 Name: Advanced Power Electronic 
Converters  L-T-P: 3-0-0 Credits: 3  
High -Power Semiconductor Devices, Diodes, SCR, GTO, GCT, IGBT. Operation of series 
connected devices: main cause of unbalance, voltage equalizations for GCTs, IGBTs. Multi -
pulse Diode and SCR Rectifiers, Definition of THD and PF, THD and PF of six -pulse di ode 
rectifier, 12, 18, 24 - pulse series -type and separate -type diode rectifiers, Six -pulse and 12 -pulse 
SCR rectifier, Effect of line and leakage inductances, and Phase -Shifting Transformers, 
Harmonic current cancellation. Cascaded HBridge Multilevel Inver ters, Introduction, Sinusoidal 
PWM, Space Vector PWM in two level voltage source inverters; H -bridge inverter, multilevel 
inverter topologies: CHB Inverter with equal dc voltages, H -bridges with unequal dc voltages, 
Carrier based PWM schemes: Phase shifted  multi -carrier modulation, Level shifted multi -
carrier modulation, over -modulation of cascaded H -bridges, Control of dc bus voltages of the 
H-bridges. Diode -Clamped Multilevel Inverters, Three level inverter: Converter configuration, 
switching states, Carrier based PWM: Naturally sampled PD PWM, APOD and POD PWM; Space 
vector modulation: Optimized space vector sequences, modulator for selecting switching 
states, decomposition method, hexagonal co -ordinate system, optimal space vector position 
within a switching period; Neutral point voltage control, over modulation of three -level 
inverter, High -level diode clamped inverters. Hybrid Multilevel Inverters: Hybridization of 
Fundamental frequency switching (FFS) and PWM switching inverters: inverter topologies with 
isolation transformer, PWM switching strategy; Transformerless hybrid  inverter: Binary H -
bridge multilevel converter, Control of dc bus voltages of different modules. Multilevel Flying 
Capacitor Inverters: Inverter configuration, Modulation scheme. PWM Current Source 
Rectifiers and Inverters: Trapezoidal modulation, Selecti ve harmonic Elimination, Space vector 
modulation, Parallel current source inverters, Single -bridge current source rectifier, Dual -
bridge current source rectifier, Power factor control, Active Damping C ontrol, Wide Band -gap 
devices and Performance and Desig n of Converters using Wide Band -gap devices.  
 
Texts/References:  
1. L.  Umanand ‘Power Electronics – Essentials and Applications’, Wiley India Pvt. Ltd., 
2009.  
2. B. Wu, ‘High Power Converter and AC Drives’, IEEE Press Wiley Interscience, 2006.  
3. M. P. Kazmierkows ki, R. Krishnan and F. Blaabjerg ‘Control in Power Electronics - 
Selected Problems’, Academic Press Series in Engineering, 2002.  
 
Subject Code: 
EE6L013  Name: Grid Integration of Renewable 
Energy Systems  L-T-P: 3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Control of frequency and voltage of distributed generation in Stand -alone and Grid -connected 
mode, use of energy storage and power electronics interfaces for the connection to grid and 
loads. Design and optimization of size of renewable sources and storage s.  
Concept of microgrid, operation of microgrid in grid -connected as well as isolated mode, power 
quality problems and fault -ride through capability of microgrid.  
Integration of large capacity renewable sources to grid: Operation and control, present tre nds, 
challenges, future technological needs viz., advanced characteristics of renewable energy Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
54 
 generating units and plants, improved flexibility in conventional generation, transmission 
technology.  
 
Texts/References:  
1. Math J. Bollen, Fainan Hassan ‘Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power System ’, IEEE Press, 2011.  
2. S. Heier and R. Waddington ‘Grid Intergration of Wind Energy Conversion Systems ’, Wiley, 2006.  
3. Loi Lei Lai and Tze Fun Chan ‘Distributed Generation: Induction and Permanent Magn et Generators’ , Wiley -IEEE 
Press, 2007.  
 
 
Subject Code: 
EE6L055  Name: Advanced Machine 
Drives  L-T-P: 
3-1-0 Credits: 4  
Induction Motor Drives: Field oriented control - Direct and indirect field orientation, stator -flux, 
rotor -flux and airgap -flux orientation. Flux -torque decoupling, Extended speed operation and 
Field weakening. Direct torque control of Induction Motor, Flux and speed observers, Induction 
generators, Doubly Fed Induction Machines (DFIM): Different modes of oper ation, Equivalent 
circuit, Active and reactive power control, Vector control of DFIM. Identification of Induction 
Motor Parameters: Linear Model, Nonlinear least square identification, Parameter error 
indices. Speed sensor -less control: Signal injection an d model based techniques, zero/low 
speed operation. Synchronous Motor Drives, Vector controlled Cycloconverter fed Drive, 
Parameter estimation and sensor -less control. Introduction to PM Synchronous Motor, Various 
rotor configurations of PMSM, Sinusoidal B ack-Emf PMSM: Field oriented control, Direct 
torque control. Interior PM Machine: Maximum torque per ampere control, Field weakening 
Introduction to Brushless DC Motor: EMF and Torque of BLDC machine, Voltage Source Inverter 
fed BLDC: Half -wave and Full -wave operation, Speed control, Torque ripple minimization, 
Sensor -less operation.  
 
Texts/References:  
1. P. C. Krause, O. Wasynczuk and S. D. Sudhoff,‘ Analysis of Electric Machinery and Drive Systems’, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York, 2006.  
2. B. K. Bose , ‘Modern Power Electronics and AC Drives ’, Pearson Education , 2005 .  
3. W. Leonhard,  ‘Control of Electric Drives ’, Springer International Edition , 2001 . 
 
 
 
Subject Code: 
EE6P053 Name: Power Converter and 
Electric Drives Laboratory  L-T-P: 
0-0-3 Credits: 2  
 
Active Power Factor control, Parameterization of Industrial Drive, Converter Drive with 
Universal motors, Self -Commutated Four quadrant converter, Slip control of asynchronous 
motor, Frequency converter with three phase asynchronous motor, Electronically commutat ed 
Synchronous machine, Smooth starting of Three phase machine,   PLC controlled Drive system  
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
55 
 SEMESTER – IX 
Subject Code: 
EE6P051 Name: Power Electronics 
System Simulation 
Laboratory  L-T-P: 0-0-3 Credits: 2  
Introduction to schematic design, Design of power PCB, Design of sandwiched Bus -bar, 
Introduction to DSP/FPGA programming for power application, PWM generation exercise, 
Simulation of DC -DC converter, Grid connected Inverter, Loss estimation techniques, Po wer 
Quality improvement studies, Input Filter design and noise reduction.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
56 
 Syllabus for Elective Courses  
Subject Code: 
EE6L056  Name: Dynamics of Linear Systems  L-T-P: 3 -0-
0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite:  None  
 
Background material on matrix algebra, differential equations, linear operators, Representation 
of dynamic systems, equilibrium points and linearization of nonlinear systems, Jordan form, 
functions of matrices, norms of vectors and matrices, Stability of s ystems, Lyapunov matrix 
equation, Natural and forced response of state equations, state space descriptions, canonical 
realizations, Observability and controllability, minimal realization, canonical decomposition, 
controllability and observability indices i n MIMO systems, Linear state variable feedback, 
stabilization, pole -placement, methods for obtaining feedback gains in MIMO systems, 
Asymptotic observers, compensator design, and separation principle, reduced order observers, 
Considerations for system gain s, Discretization of CT systems.  
 
Texts/References:  
1. Chi-Tsong Chen, Linear Systems Theory and Design, 2nd edition, HBJ 1984.  
2. K. Ogata, Modern Control Engineering, Prentice Hall, 2006.  
 
Subject Code: 
CS6L019 Name: Artificial Intelligence  L-T-P: 3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Introduction to Programing and Data Structures  
 
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence: What is AI? Related Fields, Agents and Environments  
Problem Solving: problem representation paradigms, state space, satisfiability vs optimality  
Search  Techniques:   Principles of search, uninformed search, informed search, constraint 
satisfaction problems, adversarial search and games  
Knowledge Representation: Knowledge  representation :  First order and non -monotonic 
logic;  rule based , frame and semantic network approaches, mixed representations, Theorem 
Proving, knowledge bases and inference  
Uncertainty  Treatment :  formal and empirical approaches including Bayesian theory, belief 
functions, certainty factors  
Fuzzy Logic: Tagaki -Sugeno  Fuzzy Logic;, Mamdani Fuzzy Logic, Fuzzy Bayesian Decision Method, 
Membership Functions, Fuzzification and Defuzzification, Fuzzy system Modeling  
Planning and making decisions  
Reinforcement learning: MDPs, Q -learning algorithm, applications, Bandits and Monte carlo tree 
search  
Text books:  
1. Russell and Norvig. Artifiicial  Intelligence: A Modern Approach. Pearson Education (Low Priced Edition), 
2004.  
2. Nils J. Nilsson, Artificial Intelligence - A New Synthesis, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2000  
3. George F.Luger  and William A. Stubblefield, AI:  Strcutures  and Strategies for Complex problem solving, 
2nd edition, Benjamin Cummins Publishers  
Refere nce books:  
1. Mark Stefik, Introduction to Knowledge Systems, Morgan Kaufmann.  
2. E. Rich and K.Knight, Artificial Intelligence, Tata McGraw Hill  
3. E. Charniack  and D. Mcdermott, Artificial Intelligence, Addison Wesley  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
57 
 Subject Code: 
EC6L012  Name: Optical Communication  L-T-P: 3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Analog and Digital Communications  
 Introduction: Fundamentals of Light, Optics, Optical Fibers, Dielectric waveguides: Attenuation, wavelength 
dispersion, modes, fields; Light sources and optical amplifiers: Semiconductor laser, light -emitting diode, rate 
equations, output power, modulation  response, chirp, noise, optical amplifiers. Detectors: PIN -diode, avalanche 
diode, responsivity, bandwidth, noise. Transmission systems: Optical links, direct detection systems, soliton 
systems, coherent systems, multilevel signaling, dispersion limitatio ns, attenuation limitations, additive noise, 
signal dependent noise, bit error rate, optical networks, Wavelength -Division -Multiplexing and challenges, Optical 
System Design and Performance analysis using software tools, Current issues & topics of optical fibre systems  
Text Books:   
1. G. Keiser, “Optical Fibre Communications”, Tata McGraw -Hill Education, 4th Ed., 2008.  
2. Govind Agrawal, “Fibre -Optic Communication Systems,’ 4th Ed., Wiley, 2010.  
References:   
1. J. Senior, “Optical Fibre Communications: Principles and Practice,” 3rd Ed., Prentice Hall, 2008.  
2. R. Ramaswami, K. N. Sivarajan, “Optical Networks: A Practical Perspective,” 3rd Ed., Morgan Kaufmann, 2009.  
3. S. C. Gupta, “Textbook on Optical Fiber  Communication and Its Applications,” PHI Learning, 2004.  
4. John A, “Buck Fundamental of Optical Fiber,” Wiley -Interscience, 2004.  
 
Subject Code: 
EC6L029 Name: Computer Vision  L-T-P: 3-0-0 Credits: 3  
Prerequisite: Image & Video Processing  
Introduction  to computer vision, geometric camera models, light and shading, local image 
features: SIFT, HOG, texture and shape descriptors, active contour, segmentation, deformable 
models, RANSAC, image registration, learning and classification strategies, image clas sification, 
object detection and recognition, stereopsis, tracking, applications  
Texts/References:  
1. Forsyth and Ponce, “Computer vision: a modern approach,” 2nd Ed., Pearson, 2012.  
2. Sonka, Hlavac  and Boyle, “Digital image processing and computer vision,” Cengage learning, 2008.  
3. Rick Szeliski, “Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications,” Springer,2011.  
 
The syllabi  for other elective courses for dual degree program are 
same as those  of B.  Tech . curriculum.  
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
58 
 List of Lateral Courses for Other Schools  
 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  Contact 
Hour  Syllabus 
Page No.  
Lateral – 1 (Any one will be offered)    
Transducers, Sensors and Measurement  EE2L002  3-0-0 3 3 59 
Introduction to Electromagnetic Engineering  EE2L004  3-0-0 3 3 59-60 
Lateral – 2 (Any one will be offered)    
Control System Technology  EE3L005  3-0-0 3 3 60 
Signals and Circuits  EE3L006  3-0-0 3 3  
Lateral – 3 (Any one will be offered)    
Soft Computing and Applications  EE3L008  3-0-0 3 3 61 
Utilization of Electric Power  EE3L009  3-0-0 3 3 61-62 
  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
59 
 Syllabus for Lateral Courses (For other schools)  
Subject Code: 
EE2L002  Name: Transducers, Sensors and Measurement  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 
3 
Prerequisite: None  
 
Introduction: Components of a sensor, Types of sensors, Applications; Static characteristics: 
Static calibration, static error, correction, range, span, accuracy, precision, sensitivity, 
linearity, hysteresis, dead time, dead zone, resolution, loading effect; Errors: Types of 
errors, R andom errors: mean, variance, Gaussian curve of errors, precision errors and 
precision index; Dynamic characteristics: Modelling a sensor, zero, first and second order 
systems; Primary sensing elements:  Stain gauge, variable capacitance transducer, variab le 
inductance transducer (LVDT), optical sensors, piezoelectric transducers, hall effect 
transducer; Mechanical measurements: Measurement of force, pressure, flow, 
displacement, acceleration, velocity; Temperature measurement: RTD, thermistor and 
thermocou ple; Signal conditioning circuit:  Amplifiers, Filters, Bridge circuits, A/D and D/A 
converters, Modern data acquisition systems.  
Text Books:  
1. E. O. Doebelin, “Measurement System: Application and Design,” 5th Ed., McGraw -Hill Education, 
2003.  
2. D. Patranabis,  “Principles of industrial instrumentation,” 2nd Ed.,Tata McGraw -Hill Education, 2001.  
3. A.K Sawhney, “Electrical and Electronics Measurements and Instrumentation,” 19th Ed., Dhanpat Rai 
& Co., 2011.  
 
Subject Code: 
EE2L004  Name: Introduction to Electromagnetic Engineering  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 
3 
Prerequisite: None  
 
Introduction: Sources and effects of electromagnetic fields – Vector fields – Different 
coordinate systems; Vector calculus – Gradient, Divergence and Curl - Divergence theorem 
– Stoke’s theorem; Electrostatics: Coulomb’s Law – Electric field intensity – Field due to 
point and continuous charges – Gauss’s law and application – Electric potential – Electric 
field and equipotential plots – Electric field in free space, conductors, di electric -Dielectric 
polarization - Dielectric strength - Electric field in multiple dielectrics – Boundary conditions, 
Poisson’s and Laplace’s equations – Capacitance - Energy density; Magnetostatics: Lorentz 
Law of force, magnetic field intensity – Biot–savart Law - Ampere’s Law – Magnetic field 
due to straight conductors, circular loop, infinite sheet of current – Magnetic flux density 
(B) – B in free space, conductor, magnetic materials – Magnetization – Magnetic field in 
multiple media – Boundary condit ions – Scalar and vector potential – Magnetic force – 
Torque – Inductance – Energy density – Magnetic circuits; Electrodynamic Fields: Faraday’s 
laws, induced emf – Transformer and motional EMF – Forces and Energy in quasistationary 
Electromagnetic Fields - Maxwell’s equations (differential and integral forms) – 
Displacement current – Relation between field theory and circuit theory; Electromagnetic Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
60 
 Waves: Generation – Electro Magnetic Wave equations – Wave parameters; velocity, 
intrinsic impedance, propaga tion constant – Waves in free space, lossy and lossless 
dielectrics, conductors -skin depth, Poynting vector – Plane wave reflection and refraction 
– Transmission lines – Line equations – Input impedances – Standing wave ratio and power.  
 
Text Books:  
1. Mathew N. O. SADIKU, ‘Elements of Electromagnetics’, Oxford University press Inc. First India 
edition, 2007.  
2. Ashutosh Pramanik, ‘Electromagnetism – Theory and Applications’, Prentice -Hall of India Private 
Limited, New Delhi, 2006.  
3. Joseph. A.Edminister, ‘Th eory and Problems of Electromagnetics’, Second edition, Schaum Series, 
Tata McGraw Hill, 1993.  
4. William H.Hayt, ‘Engineering Electromagnetics’, Tata McGraw Hill edition, 2001.  
5. Kraus and Fleish, ‘Electromagnetics with Applications’, McGraw Hill International  Editions, Fifth 
Edition, 1999.  
 
Subject Code: 
EE3L005  Name: Control System Technology  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 
3 
Prerequisite:  None  
 
Introduction to Control Systems: Definition, Examples of control systems, Open loop and 
closed -loop control systems, Review of Laplace and inverse Laplace transforms; System 
Modeling: Signal flow graph, Block diagram, Transfer function, Poles and zeros, Bl ock 
diagram reduction using signal flow graph and block diagram reduction techniques, 
Mechanical, electrical and electromechanical systems, First and second order models; 
Control System Components: Introduction, Linear approximation of nonlinear systems, 
Electrical systems, Stepper motor, Hydraulic systems, Pneumatic systems, Gyroscopes; 
Transient Response and Steady State Error Analysis: Definitions of transient response 
parameters, analysis of second order system as prototype, Routh -Hurwitz stability 
criterion, Classification of systems based on steady state characteristics, Steady state error 
coefficients; Root Locus Method: Definition of root locus, Properties of root locus, 
Sketching of root locus, Effect of open loop poles and zeros, Root locus design concepts; 
Frequency Response Analysis: Bode diagram, Polar plot, Nichols plot, Nyquist stability 
criterion: nonmathematical description of Nyquist criterion, interpretation of stability, 
Relative stability – Gain and Phase margin, Closed loop frequency res ponse – M and N 
contours, Nichols chart; Compensation Techniques: Compensation techniques: lag, lead 
and lag -lead compensation, PD, PI and PID controllers, Cascade compensation based on 
root locus method, Introduction to feedback compensation.  
Text Books:  
1. R. Stefani, B. Shahrian, C. Savant & G. Hostetter, “Design of Feedback Control Systems”, Oxford 
University Press, 2002.  
2. K. Ogata, “Modern Control Engineering”, Prentice Hall, 1997.  
3. B. C. Kuo & F. Golnaraghi, “Automatic Control Systems”, John Wiley, 2003.  
4. M. Gopal, “Control Systems: Principles and Designs”, 2nd Edition, McGraw Hill, 2002.  
5. R. C. Dorf & R. H. Bishop, “Modern Control Systems”, Prentice Hall, 2000.  
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
61 
 Subject Code: 
EE3L008  Name: Soft Computing and Applications  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 
3 
Prerequisite: None  
 
Artificial Neural Networks (Theory and Applications): Single and multi -layer artificial neural 
networks, radial basis function networks, recurrent neural network, functional link artificial 
neural networks. Fuzzy logic (Theory and appl ications): Mamdani fuzzy models, T -S fuzzy 
model, neuro -fuzzy systems, ANFIS. Evolutionary computing (Algorithms and Applications): 
Genetic algorithms and variants, Differential evolution, Particle swarm optimization (PSO) 
and variants, Bacterial foraging optimization (BFO), Ant colony optimization - travelling 
salesman problem, Artificial immune systems, cat swarm optimization. Multi -objective 
evolutionary algorithms: NSGA –II, multi -objective PSO and variants.  
Text Books:  
1. S. Haykin, ‘Neural Networks and Learning Machines’, Prentice Hall, 2009.  
2. Y.H. Pao, ‘Adaptive pattern recognition and neural networks’, Addison -Wesley, 1989.  
3. Rich, E., Knight, K. and Nair, S.B., ‘Artificial Intelligence’, 3rd Ed., Tata McGraw Hill. 2009  
4. Deb, K., ‘Optimization for Engineering Design Algorithms and Examples’, Prentice Hall of India. 2009.  
5. Jang, J.S.R., Sun, C.T. and Mizutani, E., ‘Neuro -fuzzy and Soft Computing: A Computational Approach 
to Learning and Machine Intelligence’, Prentice Hall, 2009.  
6. Hagan, M., ‘Neural Ne twork Design’, Nelson Candad, 2008.  
7. K.A.D. Jong, ‘Evolutionary Computation – A Unified Approach’, PHI Learning, 2009.  
 
 
Subject Code:  
EE3L009   Name: Utilization of Electric Power  L-T-P: 
3-0-0 Credits: 
3 
Prerequisite: Electrical Technology  
 
Electric Drives: Advantages of electric drives, Types of motors used in electric drive, Electric 
braking; Illumination: Definition: Luminous flux, solid angle, luminous intensity, 
illumination, luminous, efficiency, depreciation factor, coefficient, of uti lization, space to 
height ratio, reflection factor, glare, shadow, lux. Laws of illumination. Different type of 
lamps, construction and working of in candescent and dischage lamps – their 
characteristics. Calculation of number of light points for interior illumination; Electric 
Heating: Advantages of electrical heating, Heating methods - Resistance heating, Induction 
heating; Electric arc heating, Dielectric heating; Electric Welding: Advantages of electric 
welding, Welding method, Principles of resistance w elding, Principle of arc production, 
electric arc welding; Electrolytic Processes: Need of electro -deposition, Laws of electrolysis, 
process of electro -deposition - clearing, operation, deposition of metals, polishing, buffing, 
Equipment and accessories fo r electroplating; Electric Traction: Advantages of electric 
traction, Different systems of electric traction, DC and AC systems, diesel electric system, 
types of  services – urban, sub -urban, and main lines and their speed -time curves, Different 
accessorie s for track electrification;  such as overhead capacitor wire, conductor rail 
system, current collector -pantograph.  
 
Text Books:  Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
62 
 1. J B Gupta, “Utilization of Electrical Energy and Traction”,  Kataria Publications, 2014.  
2. O E Taylor, “Utilization of Electrical  Energy”, University Press -Hyderabad, 1981.  
3. G. C. Garg, “Utilization of Electric Power and Electric Traction” Khanna Publishers, 2004.  
4. Sivanagaraju “Generation and Utilization of Electrical Energy”, Pearson India, 2010.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
63 
 Summary of Course Credits: (B.  Tech. in Electrical Engineering ) 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  
SEMESTER I  
Mathematics -1 MA1L001  3-1-0 4 
Physics/  
Chemistry  PH1L001/ 
CY1L001  3-1-0 4 
 Mechanics / English for Communications  or  
 Learning English  ME1L001/  
HS1L001  
or HS1L002  3-1-0/ 
3-0-2 or  
3-1-0 4 
Electrical Technology / Introduction to 
Programing and Data Structures  EE1L001 / 
CS1L001   
3-1-0 4 
Introduction to Manufacturing Processes /  
Engineering Drawing and Graphics  ME1P001/ 
CE1P001  0-0-3/ 
1-0-3 2/3 
Physics Laboratory/  Chemistry Laboratory  PH1P001/ 
CY1P001  0-0-3 2 
Electrical Technology Laboratory   / 
Introduction to Programing and Data 
Structures Laboratory  EE1P001/  
CS1P001  0-0-3 2 
Extra Academic Activity -1 ID1T001  0-0-3 1 
  Total  22/23+1  
SEMESTER II  
Mathematics -2 MA1L002  3-1-0 4 
Chemistry/  
Physics  CY1L001/ 
PH1L001  3-1-0 4 
English for Communication   or Learning 
English /   Mechanics  HS1L001 or  
HS 1L002/ 
ME1L001  3-0-2 or              
3-1-0/ 
3-1-0 4 
Introduction to Programming and Data 
Structures/ Electrical Technology  CS1L001/ 
EE1L001  3-1-0 4 
Engineering Drawing and Graphics  / 
Introduction to Manufacturing Processes  CE1P001/ 
ME1P001  1-0-3/  
0-0-3 3/2 
Chemistry Laboratory/ Physics Laboratory  CY1P001/ 
PH1P001  0-0-3 2 
Electrical Technology Laboratory   / 
Introduction to Programing and Data 
Structures Laboratory  EE1P001/  
CS1P001  0-0-3 2 
Extra Academic Activity -2 ID1T002  0-0-3 1 
  Total  23/22+1  
SEMESTER III  
Breadth – 1  3-0-0 3 
Introduction to Electronics  EC2L001  3-1-0 4 
Introduction to  Material Science and 
Engineering  ID2L001  2-0-0 2 
Introduction to Bio Science and Technology  ID2L002  2-0-0 2 
Probability Statistics and Stochastic 
Processes  MA2L003  3-1-0 4 
Signals and Systems  EC2L002  3-1-0 4 
Introduction to Electronics Laboratory  EC2P001  0-0-3 2 
Signals and Systems Laboratory  EC2P002  0-0-3 2 
Seminar  EE2S001  0-0-3 2 
  Total  25 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
64 
 SEMESTER IV  
Lateral -1  3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 
Breadth – 2  3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 
Environmental Science Technology and 
Management  ID2L003  2-0-0 2 
Network Theory  EE2L001  3-1-0 4 
Electric Machines  EE2L003  3-1-0 4 
Digital Electronics and Microprocessor  EC2L006  3-1-0 4 
Electric Machines Laboratory  EE2P00 1 0-0-3 2 
Digital Electronics and Microprocessor 
Laboratory  EC2P006  0-0-3 2 
  Total  24/25  
SEMESTER V 
 
Lateral - 2  3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 
Breadth - 3  3-0-0 3 
Power Electronics  EE3L004  3-1-0 4 
Electrical Power Transmission and 
Distribution  EE3L007  3-1-0 4 
Measurement and Instrumentation  EE3L010  3-0-0 3 
Electromagnetic Field Theory  EE3L011  3-0-0 3 
Power Electronics  Laboratory  EE3P004  0-0-3 2 
Measurement and Instrumentation 
Laboratory  EE3P005  0-0-3 2 
  Total  24/25  
SEMESTER VI  
 
Lateral -3  3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 
Breadth – 4  3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 
Control Systems  EE3L003  3-1-0 4 
Digital Signal Processing  EC3L003  3-1-0 4 
Power System Operation and Control  EE3L012  3-1-0 4 
Control Systems Laboratory  EE3P003  0-0-3 2 
Digital Signal Processing Laboratory  EC3P002  0-0-3 2 
Power Systems Laboratory  EE3P006  0-0-3 2 
  Total  24/26  
SEMESTER VII  
 
Digital Control Systems  EE4L005  3-0-0 3 
Renewable Energy Systems  EE4L006  3-0-0 3 
Elective – 1  3-0-0 3 
Elective – 2  3-0-0 3 
Industrial Training  Defence  EE4T001   2 
Project - Part 1  EE4D001  0-0-6 4 
  Total  18 
SEMESTER VIII  
 
Elective – 3  3-0-0 3 
Elective – 4  3-0-0 3 
Elective – 5  3-0-0 3 
Elective – 6  3-0-0 3 
Renewable Energy Systems Laboratory  EE4P002  0-0-3 2 
Project - Part 1  EE4D001  0-0-9 6 
  Total  20 
  Grand Total  175-180 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
65 
 Summary of Course Credits: ( B. Tech. in Electrical Engineering  + M. 
Tech. in Power Electronics and Drives ) 
Subject Name  Code  L-T-P Credit  
SEMESTER I  
 
Mathematics -1 MA1L001  3-1-0 4 
Physics/  
Chemistry  PH1L001/ 
CY1L001  3-1-0 4 
 Mechanics / English for Communications  or  
 Learning English  ME1L001/  
HS1L001  
or HS1L002  3-1-0/ 
3-0-2 or  
3-1-0 4 
Electrical Technology / Introduction to 
Programing and Data Structures  EE1L001 / 
CS1L001   
3-1-0 4 
Introduction to Manufacturing Processes /  
Engineering Drawing and Graphics  ME1P001/ 
CE1P001  0-0-3/ 
1-0-3 2/3 
Physics Laboratory/  Chemistry Laboratory  PH1P001/ 
CY1P001  0-0-3 2 
Electrical Technology Laboratory   / 
Introduction to Programing and Data 
Structures Laboratory  EE1P001/  
CS1P001  0-0-3 2 
Extra Academic Activity -1 ID1T001  0-0-3 1 
  Total  22/23+1  
SEMESTER II  
 
Mathematics -2 MA1L002  3-1-0 4 
Chemistry/  
Physics  CY1L001/ 
PH1L001  3-1-0 4 
English for Communication   or Learning 
English /   Mechanics  HS1L001 or  
HS 1L002/ 
ME1L001  3-0-2 or              
3-1-0/ 
3-1-0 4 
Introduction to Programming and Data 
Structures/ Electrical Technology  CS1L001/ 
EE1L001  3-1-0 4 
Engineering Drawing and Graphics  / 
Introduction to Manufacturing Processes  CE1P001/ 
ME1P001  1-0-3/  
0-0-3 3/2 
Chemistry Laboratory/ Physics Laboratory  CY1P001/ 
PH1P001  0-0-3 2 
Electrical Technology Laboratory   / 
Introduction to Programing and Data 
Structures Laboratory  EE1P001/  
CS1P001  0-0-3 2 
Extra Academic Activity -2 ID1T002  0-0-3 1 
  Total  23/22+1  
SEMESTER III  
 
Breadth – 1  3-0-0 3 
Introduction to Electronics  EC2L001  3-1-0 4 
Introduction to Material Science and 
Engineering  ID2L001  2-0-0 2 
Introduction to Bio Science and Technology  ID2L002  2-0-0 2 
Probability Statistics and Stochastic 
Processes  MA2L003  3-1-0 4 
Signals and Systems  EC2L002  3-1-0 4 
Introduction to Electronics Laboratory  EC2P001  0-0-3 2 
Signals and Systems Laboratory  EC2P002  0-0-3 2 
Seminar  EE2S001  0-0-3 2 
  Total  25 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
66 
 SEMESTER IV  
 
Lateral -1  3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 
Breadth – 2  3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 
Environmental Science Technology and 
Management  ID2L003  2-0-0 2 
Network Theory  EE2L001  3-1-0 4 
Electric Machines  EE2L003  3-1-0 4 
Digital Electronics and Microprocessor  EC2L006  3-1-0 4 
Electric Machines Laboratory  EE2P001  0-0-3 2 
Digital Electronics and Microprocessor Laboratory  EC2P006  0-0-3 2 
  Total  24/25  
SEMESTER V  
 
Lateral - 2  3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 
Breadth - 3  3-0-0 3 
Power Electronics  EE3L004  3-1-0 4 
Electrical Power Transmission and Distribution  EE3L007  3-1-0 4 
Measurement and Instrumentation  EE3L010  3-0-0 3 
Electromagnetic Field Theory  EE3L011  3-0-0 3 
Power Electronics  Laboratory  EE3P004  0-0-3 2 
Measurement and Instrumentation Laboratory  EE3P005  0-0-3 2 
  Total  24/25  
SEMESTER VI  
 
Lateral -3  3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 
Breadth – 4  3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 
Control Systems  EE3L003  3-1-0 4 
Digital Signal Processing  EC3L003  3-1-0 4 
Power System Operation and Control  EE3L012  3-1-0 4 
Control Systems Laboratory  EE3P003  0-0-3 2 
Digital Signal Processing Laboratory  EC3P002  0-0-3 2 
Power Systems Laboratory  EE3P006  0-0-3 2 
  Total  24/26  
SEMESTER VII  
 
Switched Mode Power Conversion  EE6L051  3-1-0 4 
Digital Control Systems  EE4L005  3-0-0 3 
Renewable Energy Systems  EE4L006  3-0-0 3 
Theory and Analysis of Electric Drives  EE6L052  3-1-0 4 
Switched Mode Power Conversion Laboratory  EE6P052  0-0-3 2 
Industrial Training  Defence  EE4T001  0-0-0 2 
Project - Part 1  EE4D001  0-0-6 4 
  Total  22 
SEMESTER VIII  
 
Advanced Power Electronic Converters  EE6L053  3-0-0 3 
Advanced Machine Drives  EE6L055  3-1-0 4 
Grid Integration of Renewable Energy Systems  EE6L013  3-0-0 3 
Power Converter and Electric Drives Laboratory  EE6P053  0-0-3 2 
Renewable Energy Systems Laboratory  EE4P002  0-0-3 2 
Project - Part 2  EE4D002  0-0-9 6 
  Total  20 Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar  
Curriculum  
 
67 
 SEMESTER IX  
 
Elective I    3-0-0 3 
Elective II   3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 
Power Electronics System Simulation 
Laboratory  EE6P051  0-0-3 2 
Thesis Part I  EE6D051  0-0-0 12 
  Total  20/21  
SEMESTER X  
 
Elective III   3-0-0/3-1-0 3/4 
Thesis Part II  EE6D053  0-0-0 13 
  Total  16/17  
  Grand 
Total  220-228 
 